<a name="br1"></a> 

This is an Accepted Manuscript of an article published by Taylor & Francis in The Journal of

Language, Identity, and Education on 2010-07-08, available online:

<https://doi.org/10.1080/15348458.2010.486277>[.](https://doi.org/10.1080/15348458.2010.486277)[ ](https://doi.org/10.1080/15348458.2010.486277)Access to this work was provided by the

University of Maryland, Baltimore County (UMBC) ScholarWorks@UMBC digital repository on

the Maryland Shared Open Access (MD-SOAR) platform.

Please provide feedback

Please support the ScholarWorks@UMBC repository by

emailing <scholarworks-group@umbc.edu>[ ](mailto:scholarworks-group@umbc.edu)and telling us

what having access to this work means to you and why

it’s important to you. Thank you.



<a name="br2"></a> 

Citation:

Shin, S. J. (2010). ‘What about me? I’m not like Chinese but I’m not

like American.’: Heritage language learning and identity of mixed

heritage adults. The Journal of Language, Identity, and Education,

9(3), 203-219.

‘What about me? I’m not like Chinese but I’m not like American.’:

Heritage language learning and identity of mixed heritage adults

Sarah J. Shin

University of Maryland Baltimore County

Abstract

This study examines heritage language (HL) experience and identity of 12 adults

of mixed heritage backgrounds through in-depth autobiographical interviews. Each

participant has an English-speaking American parent and an HL (Chinese, Japanese,

Korean, Spanish, or Vietnamese)-speaking immigrant parent. The interviews explored

each participant’s experience in the HL while growing up, self-claimed proficiency in the

HL, attitudes toward the HL, and self- and other-perceived identities. The findings

suggest that HL proficiencies varied widely, tending to correspond with the extent of the

participants’ interaction in that language. Three participants had extensive HL experience

while nine had limited HL exposure. These nine mainly attributed their lack of HL

proficiency to their parents’ and/or their own reluctance to use the HL, which arose from

1



<a name="br3"></a> 

various societal and personal pressures to shift to English. This paper discusses the

implications of these findings on heritage language education.

Key Words: biracial adults; ethnolinguistic identity; heritage language; language attitude;

language experience; mixed heritage

2



<a name="br4"></a> 

One thing that came across… was that… all this like, we need to validate

the minorities, and they need to be proud of their heritage… And I was

like, what about me?... No one cared… And then so when you uplift these

minorities, then the people like me feel even worse… These people are

wow, they’re Spanish, or wow, they’re Korean ... But you know it’s like,

well, what about me? … I’m not like Chinese, but I’m not like American.

Well, I mean, I look Chinese, or whatever, there’s something, you know,

different, but we don’t really know.

Suzanne is a 24-year-old American of a mixed Chinese and European American

background who teaches English as a Second Language. In the above excerpt, she

describes some of her M.A. TESOL coursework which addressed the importance of

promoting the native languages and cultures of immigrant students. As someone who had

had very little opportunity to learn her father’s native language (Cantonese) growing up,

she feels that mixed heritage individuals like her are often forgotten in discussions on

heritage language learning. This study explores the language experiences and perceptions

of mixed heritage adults in the U.S. like Suzanne who have one minority language

speaking first-generation immigrant parent and one English-speaking American parent.

In recent decades, increasing attention has been given to bilingualism and heritage

languages as valuable resources for the individual, the community, and the society (He &

Xiao, 2008; Hornberger, 2002; Kondo-Brown, 2006; Peyton, Ranard & McGinnis, 2001;

Lee & Shin, 2008; Valdés, Fishman, Chávez, & Pérez, 2006). Language policy which

recognizes the rights of linguistic minority communities to maintain and strengthen their

mother tongues has been shown to have wide-ranging benefits not only for the groups

3



<a name="br5"></a> 

involved but also for the society at large (García, Skutnabb-Kangas, & Torres-Guzmán,

2006; Skutnabb-Kangas, 2000).

However, relatively few studies have specifically examined heritage language

learning by mixed heritage individuals (but see De Souza, 2006; Wright, Taylor, &

Macarthur, 2000). In most cases, mixed heritage persons are discussed in passing, as part

of larger, more homogeneous heritage language communities. Very little discussion has

focused on the specific challenges that mixed families face in maintaining heritage

languages. What are the background characteristics and experiences of mixed heritage

individuals in terms of levels of HL proficiency, language attitudes, and motivation to

learn? How are self- and other-perceived identities of mixed heritage individuals related

to their HL learning and maintenance? The current study attempts to address these

questions.

What is a ‘heritage language’?

There is much debate over what constitutes a heritage language (Wiley & Valdés,

2000). In the U.S., the term ‘heritage language’ has been used to refer to an immigrant,

indigenous, or ancestral language that a speaker has a personal relevance and desire to

(re)connect with (Wiley, 2005). The term ‘heritage language’ has been used

synonymously with ‘community language’, ‘native language’, and ‘mother tongue’ to

refer to a language other than English used by immigrants and possibly their children. For

pedagogical purposes, Valdés (2001: 38) defines a heritage language speaker as

“someone who is raised in a home where a non-English language is spoken and who

speaks or at least understands the language and is to some degree bilingual in the home

4



<a name="br6"></a> 

language and in English”. Van Deusen-Scholl (2003: 221) takes a broader view and

characterizes heritage language learners as “a heterogeneous group ranging from fluent

native speakers to non-speakers who may be generations removed, but who may feel

culturally connected to a language.” She makes a distinction between ‘heritage learners’

who have achieved some degree of proficiency in the home language and/or have been

raised with strong cultural connections from ‘learners with a heritage motivation’ who

“seek to reconnect with their family’s heritage through language, even though the

linguistic evidence of that connection may have been lost for generations” (Van Deusen-

Scholl, 2003: 222).

The individuals discussed in this study have a partial connection to a minority

language through an immigrant parent but range from minimal to high proficiency in that

language. Although English defines part of the participants’ heritage since they claim half

of their ancestry through their English-speaking American parent, I shall use the term

‘heritage language’ to refer to the minority language spoken natively by the immigrant

parent.

Heritage language learning and maintenance

Heritage language experiences and perceptions of mixed heritage persons are

worthy of investigation for several reasons. A large body of research has shown that

pressures for language shift are significant in many language minority families and

communities (e.g., DeKlerk, 2000; McCarty, Romero-Little, & Zepeda, 2006; Sandel,

Chao, & Liang, 2006; Shin, 2005; Vail, 2006; Young & Tran, 1999). Observations of

different communities that come into contact with a majority language have shown that

5



<a name="br7"></a> 

there is almost always a complete shift in language use within three generations barring

any special effort (Fishman, 1991). However, recently, more and more language minority

families and communities are undergoing a complete shift in language within two

generations with no intervening bilingual generation (Wiley, 2001). If it is hard for both

parents to successfully pass down the minority language to children in a majority

language speaking environment, it is presumably more difficult for one parent to achieve

the same goal. This difficulty is compounded by the fact that the native languages of the

mixed couple occupy different positions in the language hierarchy. It is often the minority

language speaking spouse who feels obligated to make the cultural and linguistic

adjustments of living in America as an ethnic/racial/linguistic minority. The burden of

having to learn the spouse’s language often falls on the minority language speaking

spouse, who may adapt to the mixed marriage by adopting English as the default

language of the family.

In addition, there are various social and political forces that may make it difficult

for the HL speaking parent to pass down his/her language to the children (see also,

Campbell & Christian, 2003). For example, there may be stigma associated with

marrying outside the racial/ethnic group which may limit the HL-speaking parent’s

interaction with other HL speakers in the community. Some may feel ostracized due to

marrying outside the racial/ethnic group. Some immigrants may have fled difficult life

circumstances in the country of origin (e.g., war, poverty), and may choose to abandon

their native languages in favor of English, the language of their new adopted society. The

fact that English is a high status language both in the U.S. and abroad may also lessen the

perceived importance of maintaining the minority language. Even if the language

6



<a name="br8"></a> 

minority parent sees the value of maintaining the HL, there may be practical limitations

such as lack of access to an HL speaking community and inadequate tangible resources

(e.g., language teaching materials, high quality HL schools, well-trained teachers, etc.)

which make HL learning difficult (Kondo-Brown, 2006; Peyton, Ranard & McGinnis,

2001).

The topic of the current study straddles different bodies of research on (1)

language and identity, and (2) mixed heritage identity. Since very little research has

looked at the language identity of mixed heritage individuals, in the following, I provide

separate reviews of the relevant literature in these areas.

Language and identity

Much of the research on language and identity has been on “full” heritage

individuals whose parents come from the same ethnic/racial background (e.g., Caldas,

2008; Caldas & Caron-Caldas, 2002; Kanno, 2003; King & Ganuza, 2005; Lee, 2002;

McKay & Wong, 1996; Peirce, 1995; Tse, 2000). Many of these studies suggest a link

between heritage language and ethnic and cultural identity. In her research on ethnic

identity formation, Tse (2000) examined attitudes toward the heritage language in

narratives of Americans of Asian descent. She found that for many, heritage language is

closely associated with ethnic group identification, and attitudes toward the ethnic group

and its language speakers are related to the individuals’ own language ability and interest

in maintaining their heritage language. Similarly, Lee (2002) examined the role of

cultural identity and heritage language maintenance among 40 second-generation

Korean-American university students in the U.S. and found that heritage language

7



<a name="br9"></a> 

proficiency tended to correlate with the degree of the participants’ bicultural

identification.

Many studies suggest that language identity is contextually embedded and

constructed through interaction. In a study of Japanese returnees from Canada, Kanno

(2003) showed that her participants’ Japanese and Canadian identities varied widely,

depending on where they were, with whom they were interacting, and their own

developmental phase. Such shifts in situations not only defined their relationship with

English but also their sense of linguistic and cultural confidence. Drawing from her

research on immigrant women who are learning English in Canada, Peirce (1995) showed

that individual language learners have complex and sometimes contradictory social

identity, which changes across time and space. She argues that motivation to learn a

language is not a fixed personality trait but must be understood with reference to social

relations of power that create the possibilities for language learners to speak. She argues

for the notion of ‘investment’ rather than ‘motivation’ to capture the complex relationship

of language learners to the target language.

Caldas & Caron-Caldas (2002) examined the evolving language preferences of

their three French/English bilingual children, twin girls aged 13 and a boy aged 15. The

children were raised in a predominantly French-speaking home in south Louisiana by the

bilingual French/English-speaking authors, but spent summers in French-speaking

Quebec. As the children moved into adolescence, they spoke significantly more English

in their Louisiana home, but maintained their use of French in Quebec. The children’s

preference for English in Louisiana and French in Quebec was attributed to their desire to

identify with monolingual peers in those settings. In a follow-up study, Caldas (2008)

8



<a name="br10"></a> 

examined the changing bilingual self-perceptions of the three children from early

adolescence through early adulthood. He found that the children valued their bilingualism

much more as older adolescents than as younger adolescents. As older adolescents, they

were less affected by peer pressure and had a greater sense of bilingual identity.

As one of the few studies on mixed heritage individuals’ language identity, the

research by Pao, Wong, & Teuben-Rowe (1997) suggested that language may be strongly

related to mixed heritage identity. The authors divided the participants into two groups

based on acceptance or non-acceptance of the minority culture in their upbringing. They

found that the acceptance of the minority culture allowed for a more positive self-identity,

whereas non-acceptance resulted in feelings of isolation from both cultures at times.

Mixed heritage identity

Another body of research, not related directly to language, has shown that

children of mixed marriages face a number of challenges in constructing their identity.

Living in the intersection of two cultures with different discourses and expectations, they

must negotiate group boundaries when traveling between heritage communities

(Nakashima, 1992; Root, 1996; Wallace, 2001, 2004). While many mixed heritage

individuals learn to discern and adapt to the cultural norms of each group, they are

frequently subjected to marginalization in their respective heritage communities because

of their dual ancestry and cultural experiences (Wallace, 2001). They describe how

“being mixed means they face suspicion, hostility, and other marginalizing reactions

within the community as their legitimacy and loyalty are tested across new contexts”

(Wallace, 2001: 120). Feelings of marginalization can be compounded by physical

9



<a name="br11"></a> 

appearance, as in the case of Suzanne whose more Asian features preclude her from

being seen as a mainstream English-speaking white American. Learning a heritage

language may provide some mixed heritage students with a means for gaining greater

access and legitimacy within the ethnic group.

The perception that individuals belong to one community is deeply entrenched in

our society. Conventional models of ethnic and racial identity tend to view identity

development as a linear, finite process that reflects a person’s ascribed membership

within a single heritage community (Root, 1996). Ethnic and racial diversity is often

visualized in spatial terms that neatly chart communities as separate and discontinuous

spaces. In many ways, people are seen as metaphysically bound to these spaces, naturally

“rooted” to one community through the fact of birth and blood (Malkki, 1992).

Nakashima (1992) notes how mixed heritage individuals are often expected to fit into

traditional ethnic and racial identity models since there is no space for talking about a

mixed race/ethnic experience. The labeling of mixed heritage individuals as problems is

prevalent in our envisioning of race and ethnicity.

In contrast, some recent research on mixed heritage identity accounts for diversity

in identity by highlighting the variability of racial and ethnic experience across different

contexts (Greene, 2002; King & DaCosta, 1996; Miller, 1992; Phinney & Alipuria, 1995;

Renn, 2004; Rockquemore & Brunsma, 2002; Wallace, 2001, 2004). Wallace’s (2001)

study of fifteen high school and university students from many different types of mixed

heritage backgrounds (e.g., African American and European American, Asian and

European American, Latino American and European American, Native American Indian

and European American, Afro-Caribbean and Asian American) showed ways in which

10



<a name="br12"></a> 

mixed heritage identity is situational in nature and cannot be considered as a

homogeneous group experience.

Through in-depth interviews, Wallace (2001) found that identity is dynamic

among the mixed heritage students she studied, who tended to adjust both their behavior

and ways of identifying across different social contexts depending on the nature of the

interaction or situation. Although some students identified more strongly with one of

their heritage communities, Wallace argues that the most significant finding from her

study is the existence of a stable, mixed heritage frame of reference. Using this frame of

reference as a starting point, these students construct their identities in dynamic, often

open-ended ways. These more context-sensitive studies on mixed heritage identity

represent a move away from analyzing broad inter-group processes and a step toward

articulating the uneven nature of racial and ethnic experience across traditional

communities.

Methods and Participants

Twelve adults, 8 female and 4 male, were recruited through my personal and

professional contacts. All 12 participants met the criteria that they are mixed heritage

individuals with one English-speaking American parent and a first-generation immigrant

parent who is a native speaker of a minority language (Chinese, Japanese, Korean,

Spanish, or Vietnamese) (see Table 1). The parents of seven participants had met while

the American fathers were stationed overseas on U.S. military bases. Three participants

were born overseas, but all of them had moved to the U.S. before school age and grew up

11



<a name="br13"></a> 

in the U.S. All participants have at least a bachelor’s degree from a four-year institution

except for Bryan and Donna who had some college coursework.

(Insert Table 1 about here.)

To generate the language histories of the mixed heritage adults, I conducted in-

depth, semi-structured interviews adapting an Expressive Autobiographical Interview

(EAI) approach (Wallace, 2001). The EAI blends an autobiography technique with a

structured expressive interview method to draw out the participant’s view of reality as it

relates to a desired topic. The interviewer develops questions around the topic and directs

these questions at the participant during crucial points of the participant’s narrative

account. I chose this method because a structured interview with a set of pre-established

questions does not allow for a fuller exploration of personal and historical details that

may surface during the course of the interview. I needed a more flexible approach that

could accommodate diverse experiences of individuals from a wide range of backgrounds.

The questions were related to the extent of each participant’s access to and

experience in the HL while growing up, self-claimed proficiency in the HL, attitudes

toward the HL, self- and other-perceived identities, and presence or absence of a desire to

teach the HL to the next generation (see Appendix). For the purposes of this study, the

EAI was designed to elicit information about the participant’s developmental experiences

as they relate to language learning and identity negotiation across temporal and spatial

contexts. The individual interviews lasted between 30 minutes and 1.5 hours and were

audio-recorded and transcribed.

Discussion of Findings

12



<a name="br14"></a> 

Heritage Language Experience

The linguistic profiles of the participants varied widely, depending on background

experience and extent of interaction in the HL while growing up. Participants’ HL

experiences depended largely on parental support for the HL which ranged from very

active support (e.g., Kenny) to no support (e.g., Suzanne) to active discouragement (e.g.,

Sharon). Three participants (Kenny, Monica, and Jennifer) had significant HL experience

growing up whereas the other nine had limited opportunities to learn the HL. Below, I

highlight some of the participants’ HL experiences.

Born to a Taiwanese mother and an African American father who was in the U.S.

military, Kenny described his mother as “always making sure I learned the language I

really didn’t want to learn.” He said he learned Chinese only because she emphasized it

so much.

Chinese was actually the first language I learned … since I lived in

Taiwan for about five years. It was the only language… And then when I

got here, [my mom] still tried … actually made me and my brother go to I

guess what they call Sunday school which is like a Chinese version of

language school. So all throughout elementary school, middle school, and

high school, I went to Chinese school Sundays… When I was in 8<sup>th</sup> grade,

my mom actually had an opportunity to send me and my brother to

Taiwan... And it was funny because after about two weeks there, I pretty

much started speaking like a native… After three months when we came

back, my mom said, “Wow, you guys sound completely different.”

13



<a name="br15"></a> 

Although Kenny resented having to always go to Chinese school as a child, he said he is

glad that he has kept up with the language. He currently has little opportunity to speak

Chinese on a day-to-day basis, but switches to it sometimes and surprises unsuspecting

Chinese speakers, many of whom think he is black. When Kenny was growing up, people

sometimes asked him whether he was adopted. This was because his stepfather is a white

American of an Irish-German background and his younger brother who was born to his

mother and stepfather “looks completely Chinese.” However, Kenny observed that he did

not experience any prejudice growing up as a mixed heritage person. He attributes this to

being around people who are tolerant and having close friends who are also biracial. It

also helped that his mother taught him and his brother to embrace both of their cultures

and emphasized the benefits of bilingualism.

Like Kenny, Jennifer had significant HL experience through her mother. She

described her father as an English-speaking second-generation Italian American and her

mother as an immigrant from Korea who “didn’t have much English when she first

came.” An only child, she lived with her mother until she was 19 when her father started

living with the family. Jennifer grew up deeply involved in the Chicago Korean

community and interacted frequently with her mother’s siblings and their families who

lived in the area. Jennifer stated that her Korean is much more advanced than that of

many Korean Americans who can claim full Korean heritage.

Obviously I’m like mixed but… I grew up …in more in like a Korean

community ‘cause I went to a Korean church with… lots of Korean

friends… My mom spoke to me in Korean … very much so… When I was

going to the Korean church… a lot of the young adults… people who are

14



<a name="br16"></a> 

like 21 and above … a lot of them didn’t know how to speak Korean...

they weren’t even comfortable saying like a phrase or anything. They

wouldn’t even speak [Korean]. And I just thought that that was really

strange… I could understand it way better than a lot of the full blood

Koreans.

While Jennifer never learned Korean in an institutional setting, she has visited Korea

twice. She said that when she came back from spending three weeks in Korea in 2004,

she was “really good in Korean.” Although she interacts in Korean far less now that she

is married (to an American of a German background), Jennifer considers her knowledge

of Korean important in her identity because “it was part of my upbringing.”

Like Jennifer, Monica is also highly proficient in Korean. She was born in Seoul

to a Korean mother and an African American father who was in the U.S. military. Her

parents were divorced before she turned four when she moved to the U.S. with her

mother. Her mother subsequently married a Korean man whom she met in the U.S. and

had a daughter with him. Monica explained that her stepfather had a strict Korean-only

policy at home and would ignore her and her sister if they did not address him in Korean.

She describes him as extremely traditional, “very, very strict… very, very tough”.

[My stepfather] spoke to me only in Korean… He, honestly, won’t even

acknowledge you unless you speak to him in Korean… He ignores my

sister. He’ll look at my mother and say, ‘your daughter is trying to say

something.’ That’s how it is, even now… When I look at the method that

he used to make me speak Korean, I think it’s a little extreme. I’m not

bitter about it. My sister is. Because that’s her father, you know. And she

15



<a name="br17"></a> 

has no bond with him at all. Because she doesn’t speak Korean. He

basically just doesn’t acknowledge her at all. They’re very, very strict.

Well, my stepfather is. Very, I mean, very tough. Very, very tough.

Monica attended a weekend Korean language school from when she was 11 to 16 years

of age. Although she does not look Korean, her Korean proficiency gave her access to the

Korean peer group. She said, “Koreans tend to keep to themselves… pretty homogeneous

group…they’re not very friendly to outsiders. But with me, as soon as I say something in

Korean, all of that disappears.” In college, she majored in linguistics and education and

spent a year in Mexico in a study abroad program. It was in Mexico that she tasted

independence from her parents for the first time. Immersing herself in Spanish, she

became so fluent that her Spanish proficiency seemed to have even surpassed her Korean

language skills. Monica is married to a Brazilian man from whom she learned to speak

Portuguese. She feels that her Portuguese is probably as good as her Korean now and

volunteers at a hospital as an interpreter for Korean, Spanish, and Portuguese.

Linguistically gifted, Monica loves languages and wants to learn Italian next. However,

she worried that she might “push Korean out. I tell my husband, I think I’m going to

Korea and do a four-week immersion thing…to go see my family and just be there.

Because I’m losing it. I’m so upset about that… Because it’s who I am.”

Aside from these three, the other nine participants had limited HL experience

while growing up. There were various reasons for lack of HL input as explained by the

participants. One was parental reluctance to teach it to the children. Describing her

Cantonese proficiency as “zero,” Suzanne admitted that when her father speaks

Cantonese on the phone with someone, “it’s just noise. I wouldn’t even know if they’re

16



<a name="br18"></a> 

speaking Korean.” Born and raised in Hong Kong, Suzanne’s father came to the U.S.

when he was 19 and went to a community college to become a nurse. He had made a

complete shift to English (except to use Cantonese with his relatives from time to time)

and family communication has always been in English in Suzanne’s home. Suzanne

noted that her father speaks “English all day, every day… He’s very comfortable here

and he’s pretty patriotic.”

I think I even at some point, wanted to learn Chinese... My mom said that

she even tried herself to learn and thought about putting us in Chinese

school, but my dad just wasn’t supportive… He was like, kind of

neutral… Since she couldn’t help us with homework, it’s almost

impossible. She couldn’t help. And so she was like well, I guess I won’t

do it then. So it was unfortunate….I even remember my sister expressing

the same interest in elementary school... I would like to go to Chinese

school. But nothing ever came of it. And it’s just really disappointing… I

feel like I never even got that chance.

Suzanne admitted that she cannot “claim that I’m Chinese in anyway except just my

genes. Culturally, I was raised in an American household… If I had spoken Cantonese, I

would have felt more Chinese.” However, most people who meet Suzanne for the first

time think she is Asian. She said, “I get Korean a lot. Looking at my last name, some

people think I’m Vietnamese. But nobody thinks I’m white.”

In contrast to Suzanne’s father’s indifferent attitude toward teaching Cantonese to

his children, Sharon’s mother actively discouraged Sharon from learning Vietnamese.

17



<a name="br19"></a> 

My mom never tried to teach me [Vietnamese]…She didn’t want me to

learn and she even in a sense kind of discouraged me to learn. And she

wouldn’t even correct me if I made mistakes… she doesn’t realize what a

disservice she did me…she doesn’t realize, and she didn’t realize the

cultural issues or problems growing up… Language is so important. And

they really kind of screwed us over.

Sharon explained that when her mother came to the U.S. in the 70’s, she faced a lot of

racism. Fleeing her war-torn country, Sharon’s mother felt that she had to abandon

Vietnamese and learn English to survive in America. She did not want her daughters to

endure the same kind of prejudice she suffered. However, Sharon’s experience of

growing up as a biracial person in the U.S. was anything but easy. She recalls frequently

being called “half chink” by people who noticed her mixed features. Yearning for a group

to belong to, she drifted toward Hispanics in high school because “I looked more

Hispanic back then.” In college, she started hanging around Asians more but did not feel

fully accepted by them as she “wasn’t the long haired typical Asian… It gave me kind of

a complex. For them, I was too big.” She took Vietnamese language courses in college

but her Vietnamese abilities were never adequate for her to be able to have a heart-to-

heart conversation with her mother. She described her relationship with her mother as

having a distance, which she attributes to a lack of a common language.

My mom has no sense of humor except in Vietnamese… One time, I said

some things in Vietnamese. Her face turned red and she fell off her chair.

She was laughing so hard. It was dirty language of course I didn’t learn

from her… You can’t get that kind of richness [in English].”

18



<a name="br20"></a> 

Heritage Language and Mixed Heritage Identity

While various societal and personal pressures drove the HL-speaking parents to

shift to English, some of the participants admitted that they resisted learning the HL as

children. For example, Gloria, whose mother is from Colombia, did not want to learn

Spanish because none of her friends spoke it.

Maybe around elementary school, I started noticing that my mom is tanner

than everyone else’s mothers… My mom would try to teach us Spanish

growing up but we would tell her no. I told her no and my sister told her

no… Because it was different, it was different than what everyone else

was speaking… But she still tried a little. She still spoke to us more but

she wouldn’t force us to speak. So my sister and I both understand a whole

lot more than we put out.

To Gloria, turning her back on Spanish was a way to try to fit in the English-speaking

peer group. However, later in middle school, Gloria realized that she could not be fully

accepted as a white person, which prompted her to learn Spanish as a foreign language in

middle and high schools and later in college.

When I got to middle school, everyone was like, “You’re not white. Well,

you’re not Spanish.” And I’m like, “Oh, where do I fall?”... I felt like I

had to pick a side kinda. I know I’m not white. But I’m not really Spanish.

And I think a lot of Spanish people have the belief, well, do you speak it?

While Gloria successfully obtained her B.A. in Spanish, she never finished her intended

minor in French. She explained that she “didn’t feel the connection [with French]. I had

19



<a name="br21"></a> 

no desire to know more. But with Spanish, I wanted to know more.” When asked what

she considered herself as, she answered, “I consider myself as an American but if you get

into ethnicity, I do consider myself Spanish… I’m more Colombian than American.”

Gloria had a strong desire to learn Spanish because knowledge of Spanish was intimately

connected to her evolving sense of who she was as a “Colombian, a Latina.” As Peirce

(1995) argues, Gloria’s investment in her heritage language could be seen as an

investment in her mixed heritage identity.

Similarly, Patrick described his experience of trying to fit in his peer group, which

was mostly white. However, he was often ridiculed for his Asian features, which left him

confused about his identity. Blaming his trials on his part-minority heritage, he repeatedly

made fun of his mother’s accent and pestered her for speaking Korean to him. His

resistance to Korean was so strong that his mother eventually gave up trying to teach it to

him.

People called me Chinese, Chinese boy… At first it was confusing. I just

wanted to be white… I tried opening my eyes wider… Eventually I

learned that it didn’t matter… [My mother] had tried to [teach me Korean].

And I’ve always been like a real goofball. I made fun of her and stuff, and

didn’t want to learn. I was just really annoying I guess and she pretty

much gave up. But I’ve learned some basic things… all the bad words,

you know, baby talk, things like that. But to actually speak, no I, I kind of

put her off to it… Well, I mean I regret, I wish I did learn.

Both Gloria and Patrick initially rejected their heritage languages because they wanted to

identify with the mainstream white group. But, as their later acceptance and, in the case

20



<a name="br22"></a> 

of Gloria, active pursuit of HL demonstrate, negotiation of mixed heritage identity is a

dynamic and continuous process, sensitive to changing social contexts and developmental

phases (Tse, 1998; Wallace, 2001).

Similar to Gloria and Patrick, Julie’s motivation to learn Japanese was based on

the fact that she was not accepted fully as a white person. Growing up in an all white

neighborhood, she felt as though she was “always in an identity crisis.” She shared that it

was not until she was in her 30’s that she finally started feeling comfortable with herself.

I always felt like an outcast because I was always made fun of… They

would call me chink, or jap or any other name like that and so I found it

very hard to trust people… I felt like I was Japanese but then I wasn’t, and

so I felt like I had to try and be Japanese and in order to do that I had to

speak it. And so, it was sort of an effort to finally fit in somewhere. You

know, to say, okay, I belong somewhere.

Julie’s mother did not speak Japanese to her and her brother while they were growing up.

In high school, Julie asked her mother to send her to a Japanese language school and

studied Japanese on her own. She then went on to study Japanese in college, did a study

abroad in Japan for a year, and lived and worked there for two additional years. Although

she had had very little contact with Japanese speakers growing up, Julie learned so much

Japanese in those three years that she could consider herself an advanced speaker. The

three years that Julie spent in Japan were critically important in shaping her mixed

heritage identity.

When I’m not exposed to Japanese for a while, I feel like a part of me is

missing… I feel like starved a little bit... I need that dose of … part of my

21



<a name="br23"></a> 

heritage just to feel grounded again almost… When I go back to Japan, I

just feel like that part of me is filled again… I feel like, in America, it’s

like I have to either give it up, you know, because you speak English

everyday and it’s just not really around you and you have to make an

effort to put it into your life. And so I miss it… I miss the way people

interact with each other [in Japan].

Julie now speaks to her mother in Japanese and observes that they get along much better

than they used to in the past. She explains, “I think [a lot of our conflict] had to do with

her misunderstanding, the tone, the way things were said. Whereas when I speak to her in

Japanese now, things go a lot smoothly.” Julie’s experience supports the findings of

many studies that show the benefits of heritage language learning on parent-child

communication in immigrant families (e.g., Shin, 2005; Wong Fillmore, 2000).

Whatever the reasons might have been for lack of HL learning while growing up,

some of the participants described having various feelings of loss, sadness, and bitterness

in not having knowledge of their HL. For example, Octavia feels that Vietnamese is an

integral part of her identity that is missing. She laments that lack of knowledge of

Vietnamese prevents her from communicating adequately with her mother and relatives

on her mother’s side, including a half-sister who was born and raised in Vietnam.

To me, [Vietnamese] is a part of me that’s missing…it’s sort of a void. I

mean I’m a complete person but it’s still a part missing… I have an older

sister that I met like maybe early 90’s, born and raised in Vietnam. And

coming to the States where she didn’t really know any English or very

little and I couldn’t communicate with her. You know what I mean? This

22



<a name="br24"></a> 

is your family… It’s a disconnect. You can’t communicate with your own

blood.

Octavia is married to a Cambodian American who is bilingual in Khmer and English.

Wanting to instill a strong sense of Cambodian identity in their two young daughters,

Octavia gave them only Cambodian names. However, much to her dismay, her husband

is not very keen on passing down Khmer to their children and does not speak it to them.

Octavia wants to learn Khmer but there are no Khmer classes near where she lives and

Khmer books are hard to find. Octavia’s situation is similar to that of Suzanne’s mother

who, as a non-Cantonese speaker, found the task of teaching Cantonese to her mixed

heritage children extremely daunting.

Knowledge of the HL is intimately connected to how Suzanne sees herself. She

feels that her lack of knowledge of Cantonese prevents her from considering herself as

Chinese. Assessing Cantonese to be too difficult for her to learn as an adult and yet

determined to gain fluency in a language other than English, Suzanne has been studying

Italian for the past several years.

If I had spoken Cantonese, I would have felt a lot more Chinese… I think

it would have affected how I felt, you know, my identity a lot more…

There isn’t bitterness… I don’t know if I can say regret because it wasn’t

my choice. But I think there is sadness. There’s also frustration because

number one it would have been a whole lot easier… Just the initial

exposure would have made it easier. But now, any language, I’m starting

from scratch… I love language. It’s been a dream to be fluent for me, for a

long time… Any language, I don’t care… I have the best shot with Italian

23



<a name="br25"></a> 

so I’m just going with it… It’s kind of maybe my way of compensating.

Well I didn’t have the opportunity to be Chinese so I can be sort of an

adopted Italian… Something other than just American.

Suzanne’s statement that she wants to be “something other than just American” suggests

a mixed heritage frame of reference (Wallace, 2001) from which she envisions a new

identity as an ‘adopted Italian’. As Kanno & Norton (2003) argue, language learners have

images of the communities in which they want to participate in the future, and these

“imagined communities” have a large impact on their current learning. Although Suzanne

is not a member of her “imagined community,” she hopes to gain access to it one day. It

is not only Suzanne’s current social participation that affects her learning of Italian but

also her imagined future affiliations.

Intergenerational Transmission of the HL

The participants’ responses to the question of whether they would like to teach the

HL to their (future) children were largely dependent on their own HL experience as well

as their views of their own and their children’s identity. The three participants who had

extensive exposure to HL as children (Kenny, Jennifer, and Monica) said they would

certainly teach it and “start early.” As for the remaining participants, their responses

ranged from “yes, definitely” (Bryan) to “I would make the option available to them but

the choice is theirs” (Michael) to “no, I wouldn’t” (Donna). Bryan and his African

American partner have a five-year-old son whom they want to help learn Chinese by

letting him interact with his Taiwanese relatives.

24



<a name="br26"></a> 

I have a five year old… Teaching him Chinese is definitely something that

I do plan on doing. With his mother… she’s definitely open to it… one of

my aunts and… my cousins they live not too far from us so we’ve made it

clear to my little cousins who are very proficient in Chinese that we want

Jerome to learn… Regardless of what percentage of him is Chinese, he is

Chinese. Because I’m half-Chinese. Whether that makes him a quarter-

Chinese, he has it in his blood. And I think that’s important… which is

also kind of like my drive with wanting to learn… I think it’s important

that he learn because he is that.

Bryan’s motivation to teach Chinese to his son is rooted in his view of his son being part-

Chinese, which is also what motivates Bryan to learn more Chinese as an adult.

While identity figured considerably into some of the participants’ desire to teach

their HL to the next generation, most of the ambivalent or negative responses stemmed

from practical limitations such as the participants’ own lack of HL proficiency and the

desire not to teach the wrong way to speak the language. For example, Donna who had

very little interaction in Korean growing up said, “I wouldn’t teach them Korean ‘cause

I’d mess it up. But I would encourage them to learn different languages… like if they go

to a school that offered Korean, I would encourage them to take that before anything

else.” When parents cannot serve as effective models of HL use, children clearly stand at

a disadvantage in terms of learning the HL. However, there may be creative solutions to

help such families to learn the HL which I discuss in the next section.

Conclusion and Implications

25



<a name="br27"></a> 

Perhaps the most important conclusion to be drawn from this exploratory study is

the need for greater attention to individuals who do not fit the traditional profile of the

heritage language learner. The twelve mixed heritage individuals discussed in this study

expressed varying degrees of desire to learn their HL in order to connect with part of their

heritage, as well as to define their ethnic and cultural identity (Kondo-Brown, 2003; Van

Deusen-Scholl, 2003). The current study is limited by a small number of participants that

represent a vast array of mixed heritage backgrounds (e.g., Chinese, Colombian, Japanese,

Korean, Taiwanese, and Vietnamese from one parent, and African- or European-

American from the other). Furthermore, seven of the twelve participants have military

fathers. Since the ethnic groups represented in this study are quite different and may have

different views on ethnic criteria such as the ability to speak the HL or the presence of

ethnic physical features, future research may investigate individuals from these different

backgrounds separately and in greater detail than the current study has done.

Despite these limitations however, the current study has shown that for many

mixed heritage individuals, the heritage language may figure importantly into their

understanding of who they are. Living at the intersection of two cultures, mixed heritage

individuals are frequently subjected to marginalization in their respective heritage

communities because of their dual ancestry (Nakashima, 1992; Wallace, 2001). This

study showed that while some of the participants used their knowledge of the HL to gain

greater access to and legitimacy in the HL community, some who never developed in

their HL lamented not being able to connect with their HL-speaking parents and extended

family members at a deeper level. Thus, knowledge of the heritage language seems to be

a considerable facet of mixed heritage identity for at least for some of the participants.

26



<a name="br28"></a> 

This study also showed that negotiation of mixed heritage identity is dynamic and

continuously shaped by changing social contexts and developmental phases (Kanno,

2003; Peirce, 1995; Tse, 1998; Wallace, 2001). Some of the participants reportedly

rejected their heritage language at various stages of their development in an effort to

identify more with the mainstream group, only to embrace it later in their lives (see also

Caldas, 2008).

These conclusions point to several implications. First, parents need to be educated

about the importance of intergenerational transmission of the HL (Fishman, 1991;

Hornberger, 1998). Successful language learning and maintenance strategies usually

involve the efforts which must start with language transmission at the level of the family

(Campbell & Christian, 2003). As perhaps the single most important source of heritage

language input, parents play a major role in children’s language learning. But in order for

the heritage language to be successfully learned by children in mixed families, there must

be concerted effort by both the HL- and non-HL-speaking parents to promote the use of

the HL. HL-speaking parents should be supported to speak the heritage language to

children and have the children respond in that language. If the HL-speaking parent has

limited proficiency in the HL, one may connect with HL-speaking relatives or members

of the HL-speaking community for opportunities to interact socially in that language.

Second, this study emphasizes the importance of providing mixed heritage

children with voluntary opportunity to participate in heritage language education, which

is broad and intensive enough to enable them to fully develop a range of communicative

repertoire in that language. This may involve not only HL learning in institutional

settings but also trips to the HL parent’s country of origin and sustained associations with

27



<a name="br29"></a> 

HL-speaking peer and social networks. HL programs need to recognize the unique set of

challenges that face mixed heritage students as they learn the language of one of their

parents. HL teachers and staff should be mindful of the possibility that experiences of

marginalization at HL schools can drive some mixed heritage students away from the HL,

and strive to create a classroom atmosphere that is inclusive of diverse experiences and

identities.

This study also calls for the need to offer HL programs for adult learners who

have not had much experience with the HL growing up but nevertheless wish to learn the

HL as a way to (re)connect with their heritage. As it happens, most of the existing

community-based HL programs in the U.S. are geared toward school-age children and

curriculum and materials may not be entirely appropriate for adult HL learners. One

possibility might be for community-based HL programs to collaborate with university-

based HL programs, many of which already cater to mixed heritage populations and have

more established adult-oriented curriculum and materials. Similarly, there is a need to

think creatively about program options to include families, such as classes in which

children and non-HL-speaking parents can participate together.

At a time when the nation is becoming more linguistically and culturally diverse,

improving the heritage language education of mixed heritage populations is a worthwhile

effort not only for the individuals involved but also for our society.

Acknowledgments

I am grateful to the two anonymous Journal of Language, Identity, and Education

reviewers for their very helpful comments on an earlier version of this article. I would

28



<a name="br30"></a> 

also like to thank the participants of this study who generously gave me their time and

attention.

References

Caldas, S.J. (2008). Changing bilingual self-perceptions from early adolescence to early

adulthood: Empirical evidence from a mixed-method case study. Applied

Linguistics, 29(2), 290-311.

Caldas, S.J. & Caron-Caldas, S. (2002). A sociolinguistic analysis of the language

preferences of adolescent bilinguals: Shifting allegiances and developing

identities. Applied Linguistics, 23, 490-514.

Campbell, R.N. & Christian, D. eds. (2003). Directions in research: Intergenerational

transmission of heritage languages. Heritage Language Journal, 1(1), 1-44.

DeKlerk, V. (2000). Language shift in Grahamstown: A case study of selected Xhosa-

speakers. International Journal of the Sociology of Language, 146, 87-110.

De Souza, A.B.B. (2006). 'Should I speak Portuguese or English?': Ethnic and social

identity construction in the language choices of Brazilian mothers and their

mixed-heritage children at home and in a community language school in the UK.

Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of Southampton.

Fishman, J.A. (1991). Reversing language shift. Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.

García, O., Skutnabb-Kangas, T., & Torres-Guzmán, M.E. eds. (2006). Imagining

multilingual schools: Languages in education and glocalization. Clevedon:

Multilingual Matters.

29



<a name="br31"></a> 

Greene, W.L. (2002). Ethnic identity and the sociocultural playing field: Choices made

by ethnically mixed adolescents in Hawai’i. In D.M. McInerney & S. Van Etten

(eds.), Sociocultural influences on motivation and learning (pp. 23-54).

Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing.

He, A.W. & Xiao, Y. eds. (2008). Chinese as a heritage language: Fostering rooted

world citizenry. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.

Hornberger, N.H. (1998). Language policy, language education, language rights:

Indigenous, immigrant, and international perspectives. Language in Society, 27,

439-458.

Hornberger, N.H. (2002). Multilingual language policies and the continua of biliteracy:

An ecological approach. Language Policy, 1, 27-51.

Kanno, Y. (2003). Negotiating bilingual and bicultural identities: Japanese returnees

betwixt two worlds. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

Kanno, Y. & Norton, B. (2003). Imagined communities and educational possibilities:

Introduction. Journal of Language, Identity, and Education, 2, 241-249.

King, K. & Ganuza, N. (2005). Language, identity, education, and transmigration:

Chilean adolescents in Sweden. Journal of Language, Identity, and Education,

4(3), 179-199.

King, R.C., & DaCosta, K.M. (1996). Changing face, changing race: The remaking of

race in the Japanese American and African American communities. In M.P.P.

Root (ed.), The multiracial experience: Racial borders as the new frontier (pp.

227-244). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

30



<a name="br32"></a> 

Kondo-Brown, K. (2003). Bilingual heritage students: Language contact and motivation.

In Z. Dornyei and R. Schmidt. (Eds.). Motivation and second language

acquisition. (pp.425-452). Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press.

Kondo-Brown, K. ed. (2006). Heritage language development: Focus on East Asian

immigrants. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.

Lee, J.S. (2002). The Korean language in America: The role of cultural identity in

heritage language learning. Language, Culture, and Curriculum, 15, 117-133.

Lee, J.S. and Shin, S.J. (Guest Eds.). (2008). Korean as a Heritage Language [Special

issue]. Heritage Language Journal, 6(2).

McCarty, T.L., Romero-Little, M.E. & Zepeda, O. (2006). Native American youth

discourses on language shift and retention: Ideological cross-currents and their

implications for language planning. International Journal of Bilingual Education

and Bilingualism, 9(5), 659-677.

McKay, S.L., & Wong, S.C. (1996). Multiple discourses, multiple identities: Investment

and agency in second-language learning among Chinese adolescent immigrant

students. Harvard Educational Review, 66, 577-608.

Malkki, L. (1992). National Geographic: The rooting of peoples and the territorialization

of national identity among scholars and refugees. Cultural Anthropology, 7(1),

24-43.

Miller, R.L. (1992). The human ecology of multiracial identity. In M.P.P. Root (ed.),

Racially mixed people in America (pp. 24-36). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

31



<a name="br33"></a> 

Nakashima, C.L. (1992). An invisible monster: The creation and denial of mixed-race

people in America. In M.P.P. Root (ed.), Racially mixed people in America.

Newbury Park, California: Sage.

Pao, D., Wong, S., & Teuben-Rowe, S. (1997). Identity formation for mixed-heritage

adults and implications for educators. TESOL Quarterly, 31(3), 622-631.

Peirce, B.N. (1995). Social identity, investment, and language learning. TESOL Quarterly,

29(1), 9-31.

Phinney, J., & Alipuria, L. (1995). At the interface of cultures: Multiethnic/multiracial

high school and college students. Journal of Adolescent Psychology, 136, 139-158.

Renn, K.A (2004). Mixed race college students: The ecology of identity, race, and

community on campus. Albany: State University of New York Press.

Rockquemore, K.A., & Brunsma, D.L. (2002). Beyond black: Biracial identity in

America. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Root, M.P.P. ed. (1996). The multiracial experience: Racial borders as the new frontier.

Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

Sandel, T.L., Chao, W.-Y., and Liang, C.-H. (2006). Language shift and language

accommodation across family generations in Taiwan. Journal of Multilingual and

Multicultural Development, 27(2), 126-147.

Shin, S.J. (2005). Developing in two languages: Korean children in America. Clevedon,

UK: Multilingual Matters.

Skutnabb-Kangas, T. (2000). Linguistic genocide in education – or worldwide diversity

and human rights? Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.

32



<a name="br34"></a> 

Tse, L. (1998). Ethnic identity formation and its implications for heritage language

development. In Krashen, S.D., Tse, L., and McQuillan, J. (eds.), Heritage

language development (pp. 15-29). Culver City, CA: Language Education

Associates.

Tse, L. (2000). The effects of ethnic identity formation on bilingual maintenance and

development: An analysis of Asian American narratives. International Journal of

Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, 3(3), 185-200.

Vail, P. (2006). Can a language of a million speakers be endangered? Language shift and

apathy among Northern Khmer speakers in Thailand. International Journal of the

Sociology of Language, 178, 135-147.

Valdés, G. (2001). Heritage language students: Profiles and possibilities. In Peyton, J.K.,

Ranard, D.A., and McGinnis, S. (eds.), Heritages languages in America:

Preserving a national resource (pp. 37-77). McHenry, IL: Center for Applied

Linguistics and Delta Systems.

Valdés, G., Fishman, J.A., Chávez, R., & Pérez, W. (2006). Developing minority

language resources: The case of Spanish in California. Clevedon: Multilingual

Matters.

Van Deusen-Scholl, N. (2003). Toward a definition of heritage language: Sociopolitical

and pedagogical considerations. Journal of Language, Identity, and Education,

2(3), 211-230.

Wallace, K.R. (2001). Relative/ Outsider: The art and politics of identity among mixed

heritage students. Westport, Connecticut: Ablex.

33



<a name="br35"></a> 

Wallace, K.R. (2004). Situating multiethnic identity: Contributions of Discourse theory to

the study of mixed heritage students. Journal of Language, Identity, and

Education 3(3), 195-213.

Wiley, T.G. (2001). On defining heritage languages and their speakers. Heritage

languages in America. In Peyton, J.K., Ranard, D.A., and McGinnis, S. (eds.),

Heritages languages in America: Preserving a national resource (pp. 29-36).

McHenry, IL: Center for Applied Linguistics and Delta Systems.

Wiley, T. (2005). The reemergence of heritage and community language policy in the

U.S. national spotlight. Modern Language Journal, 89(4), pp. 594-601.

Wiley, T. & Valdés, G. (2000). Heritage language instruction in the United States: A time

for renewal. Bilingual Research Journal. Vol24/4, i-v.

Wong Fillmore, L. (2000). Loss of family languages: Should educators be concerned?

Theory into Practice, 39(4), 203-210.

Wright, S., Taylor, D., & Macarthur, J. (2000). Subtractive bilingualism and the survival

of the Inuit language: Heritage-versus second-language education. Journal of

Educational Psychology, 92(1), 63-84.

Young, R. and Tran, M. (1999). Language maintenance and shift among Vietnamese in

America. International Journal of the Sociology of Language, 140, 77-82.

34



<a name="br36"></a> 

Table 1. Overview of the Participants[<sup>1</sup>](#br36)

Gender Age Father Mother

Name

Place of

birth

Sibling(s) Marital Occupation

Status

Octavia\* Female 29

Monica\* Female 29

Black

Black

Vietnamese Washington, 1 older

Married Full-time

mom

DC

sister

Korean

Seoul,

Korea

1 younger Married Realtor,

half-sister

Mary Kay

consultant,

interpreter

Gloria

Female 31

Female 27

White

White

Colombian Baltimore,

MD

Vietnamese Washington, 1 older

1 younger Married Speech

sister

therapist

Married Graphic

Artist

Sharon

DC

adopted

sister

Patrick\* Male

Michael\* Male

30

32

White

Black

Korean

Augusta,

GA

1 younger Married Engineer

brother

Taiwanese San

Antonio,

1 younger Single

brother

Government

employee

TX

Bryan\*

Julie

Male

28

Black

White

Taiwanese Japan

1 older

brother

Single

Claims

prevention

specialist

Female 35

Japanese

Red Bank,

1 older

brother

Married Student and

full-time

NJ

mom

Suzanne Female 24

Chinese White

Baltimore,

MD

1 younger Single

brother, 1

younger

ESOL

Teacher

sister

Kenny\*

Male

29

Black

Taiwanese Taiwan

1 younger Single

half-

Marketing

Specialist

brother

Jennifer Female 27

Donna\* Female 26

White

Black

Korean

Korean

Evanston,

IL

Monterey,

CA

No

Married Accountant

sibling

1 older

brother

Single

Bartender,

Musician

\*The fathers of these participants were in the U.S. military.

<sup>1</sup> All participants were given pseudonyms.

35



<a name="br37"></a> 

Appendix: Interview Questions

\1) Please tell me your name, age, your current residence, your occupation, and

highest education.

\2) Where were you born? Where were you raised?

\3) Please tell me about your family\. Where were your parents from? How did they

meet? Your mother’s and father’s (language) background. Do you have any

siblings? How old are they? Where do they live? (spouse? children?) What is/was

your family like? (relationships with family members, other relatives, etc.)

\4) What was it like for you growing up as a mixed heritage person? What were the

ethnic/racial backgrounds of your friends?

\5) Did your mother (father) speak to you in Language X as you were growing up?

\6) How much contact with Language X speakers did you have growing up? How

about now?

\7) Did you go to any community heritage language school (weekend school)? If so,

when and for how long?

\8) How proficient are you in Language X? (listening, speaking, reading, and writing)

\9) Have you ever been to your mother’s (father’s) country of origin? If so, when and

for how long?

\10) How important was proficiency in Language X for you as you were growing up?

How important was it for your parent(s)?

\11) How important is proficiency in Language X for you now as an adult?

\12) Do you ever wish that you could speak (read, write) Language X better? Why or

why not?

36



<a name="br38"></a> 

\13) How were you received by people from your father’s ethnic/racial background?

How were you received by people from your mother’s ethnic/racial background?

\14) How do strangers see you? Can people guess your ethnic/racial background?

What kind of comments do people make about your physical appearance,

language (speech), name, other?

\15) If you could relive your childhood, is there anything you wish your parents had

done differently in terms of language?

\16) How do you identify yourself ethnically/racially?

\17) How important is knowledge of Language X in your identity as (your response to

#16)?

\18) If you have children, would you teach them Language X (or any other language

other than English)? Why or why not?

37


