## Part I: Words with Cupid, and The Task
## 第一部分：与丘比特的话语，以及任务

Love, having read the name and title on this book,<br/>
爱神， 在读完了这本书的名字和标题以后，

said: ‘It’s war, you declare against me, I see, it’s war’.<br/>
说：“这是战争，你向我发起的战争，我看出来了，这是战争。”

‘Cupid, don’t condemn your poet for a crime, who has so often<br/>
“丘比特，不要因为罪行而谴责你的诗人，他曾多次

raised the standard, you trusted him with, under your command.<br/>
提高了标准，你信任他的（标准），在你的指挥下。

I’m not Diomede, by whom your mother was wounded,<br/>
我不是伤害你母亲的狄俄墨得斯，

she, carried back to the clear heavens on Mars’s steeds.<br/>
她，骑着战神玛尔斯的骏马，回到了澄澈的天空。

**Other young men often grow cool: I’ve always loved,<br/>
其他年轻人经常变得冷漠：我(却)一直爱着，**

**and if you ask me now, too, what I do, I love.<br/>
如果你现在问我，我在做什么，我（仍然）在爱。**

Indeed I’ve taught, as well, by what art you can be won,<br/>
确实，我也教过你，通过什么技巧你能胜出，

and what was passion before, is now reason.<br/>
而曾经的激情，现在变成了理智。

Sweet Boy, I’ve not betrayed you or my art,<br/>
甜美的男孩，我没有背叛你或我的艺术，<br/>


and this new Muse unravels no prior work.<br/>
而这位新的缪斯没有推翻任何先前的作品。

Let him rejoice in happiness, any eager man who loves<br/>
让他在幸福中欢欣雀跃，任何热切爱着

and delights in love: let him sail with the wind.<br/>
并沉醉于爱的人,让他随风航行。

But any man who suffers badly from the power of a worthless girl,<br/>
但任何一个深受不值得女人的魅力之苦的男人，

shouldn’t die, if he understands the help that’s in my art.<br/>
便不应轻生,若能领悟我技艺中的奥妙。

Why should any lover hang from a high beam,<br/>
为什么任何恋人要从高梁上悬挂，

a sad weight, with a knotted rope round his neck?<br/>
成为一个悲伤的重量，脖子上缠绕着打结的绳索？

Why should anyone stab himself with cold steel?<br/>
为什么有人要用冰冷的钢刀刺向自己？

Lover of Peace, you earn dislike for such hateful death.<br/>
热爱和平的人啊，你因如此可恨的死法而招致厌恶。

Let him who’ll die of wretched passion unless he quits it,<br/>
让那除非放弃痛苦的激情，就会因它而将要死去的人，

quit it: and you’ll be the cause of no one’s funeral.<br/>
放弃吧：如此，你便不会成为任何葬礼的原因。

And you’re a boy: you’re not fit for anything but play:<br/>
而你是个男孩：你除了玩耍什么都不适合：

play then: a sweet dominion suits your years.<br/>
那就玩吧：一个适合你年龄的甜蜜的领域。

For you might have used naked arrows with which to war:<br/>
因为你本可以用赤裸的箭矢去战斗：

but your shafts are free of deadly blood.<br/>
但你的箭矢将豁免于沾染致命的鲜血。

Your stepfather Mars may fight with swords and sharp spears,<br/>
你的继父战神马尔斯可能用剑和锋利的长矛战斗，

and as a victor stride through the carnage:<br/>
作为胜利者穿行在杀戮之中：

you cultivate your mother’s arts, which are safe to use,<br/>
你修习你母亲（爱与美之神维纳斯）的技艺，这些（爱的）技艺使用起来是安全的，

through whose fault no parent’s ever bereaved.<br/>
不会让任何父母因你而失去子女。

Make doors burst open to nocturnal fights,<br/>
让门在夜间的战斗中被猛烈撞开，

and the entrance be buried in many fine garlands:<br/>
入口被许多精美的花环覆盖：

have young men and shy girls meet secretly,<br/>
让年轻男子和害羞的少女秘密相会，

and cheat watchful husbands by whatever art:<br/>
并用各种技艺欺骗警惕的丈夫：

and now let the lover who’s shut out, speak flatteringly,<br/>
现在，让被拒之门外的恋人，甜言蜜语地劝说，

and now curse the rigid doorpost, and, weeping, sing.<br/>
现在让他们诅咒那坚固的门柱，哭泣，歌唱。

You, be content with these tears, with no guilt for death:<br/>
你，满足于这些眼泪，无需为死亡承担罪责：

it’s not fitting for your torch to plunge beneath greedy pyres.’<br/>
你的火炬不应点燃贪婪的火葬堆中。

So I spoke: golden Love moved his jewelled wings,<br/>
正当我说完：金色的爱神展开了他的宝石般闪耀的翅膀，

and said to me: ‘Finish the work you planned.’<br/>
对我说：“完成你计划的诗篇吧。”

Come to my teaching, young men who’ve been deceived,<br/>
来听我的教诲吧，曾被欺骗的年轻人们，

you whose love has utterly betrayed you.<br/>
你们的爱彻底背叛了你们。

Learn how to be cured, from him who taught you how to love:<br/>
学习如何被疗愈，向那教会你们如何去爱的人（_译者：指丘比特本人_）学习：

the one hand brings the wound and the relief.<br/>
同一只手带来了伤痕与救赎。

The same earth nurtures healing herbs as harmful,<br/>
同样的土地上孕育着治愈的草药和有毒的植物，

and the nettle’s often near to the rose:<br/>
荨麻常常与玫瑰相邻：

Achilles’s spear that once wounded Telephus, his enemy,<br/>
阿喀琉斯的长矛曾刺伤特勒福斯，他的敌人，

_阿喀琉斯在战斗中用长矛刺伤了特勒福斯，但他的伤口无法痊愈。<br/>
特勒福斯得知只有阿喀琉斯的长矛才能治愈他，于是寻求阿喀琉斯的帮助。<br/>
阿喀琉斯最初不愿意，但最终同意，<br/>
用长矛上的锈和碎片敷在特勒福斯的伤口上，奇迹般地治愈了他。_

also brought the cure for the wound.<br/>
也带来了治愈伤口的解药。

But believe me, girls, I tell to you whatever I tell the men:<br/>
但请相信我，女孩们，我告诉男孩们的任何话，也同样告诉你们：

I grant weapons to either side:<br/>
我将兵刃赐予双方：

and if any of it does not apply to your needs,<br/>
如果武器任何一部分不适用于你的需求，

it can still teach you a great deal by example.<br/>
它依然可以通过示例教会你许多。

It’s a good idea to quench fierce flames,<br/>
熄灭熊熊烈火是个好主意，

don’t let your heart be slave to your failings.<br/>
不要让你的心为失败所奴役。

Phyllis would have lived, if she’d used me as her master,<br/>
菲丽丝将会活下来，如果她以我为师，

and gone the way she went, nine times, more often.<br/>
她将会安然度过她的命运，九次，（甚至）更多。

_菲丽丝是色雷斯的公主，爱上了雅典国王忒修斯的儿子德摩丰（Demophon）。<br/>
德摩丰在参加完特洛伊战争后路经色雷斯，与菲丽丝相爱并承诺会回来迎娶她。<br/>
然而，德摩丰返回雅典后迟迟未归，菲丽丝因思念和绝望多次往返海岸，<br/>
期盼他的归来。据说，她一共九次来到海边等待德摩丰的归来，<br/>
最终绝望之下自杀。她的死被描述为由于绝望和失望而自缢。<br/>
菲丽丝被变成了一棵杏树，象征她对德摩丰的等待和忠诚。_

Dido, as she died, would not have watched the Trojan ships,<br/>
狄多，在她弥留之际，不必遥望特洛伊的船只，

from the summit of her tower, as they set sail:<br/>
从塔顶守望，当它们杨帆启航。

_狄多是迦太基的女王，爱上了特洛伊的英雄埃涅阿斯。<br/>
由于神的意志，埃涅阿斯必须离开狄多，去完成建立罗马的命运。<br/>
狄多绝望之下，在塔顶看着埃涅阿斯的船离开，最后自杀了。<br/>
她的故事主要出现在古罗马诗人维吉尔（Virgil）的史诗《埃涅阿斯纪》（Aeneid）中。_

nor would pain have armed Medea against her children,<br/>

taking vengeance on her husband by harming his offspring.<br/>

By using my art, Tereus, when Philomela charmed him,<br/>

would not have deserved to become a bird for his crime.<br/>

Give Pasiphae to me, then, surely, she’d lose her love for the bull:<br/>

Give me Phaedra: Phaedra’s shameful love will vanish.<br/>

Trust Paris to me, Menelaus would have Helen,<br/>

and Troy not conquered to fall at the hands of Greeks.<br/>

If impious Scylla could have read my books,<br/>

Nisus, the purple lock would cling to your head.<br/>

With me as leader, quench your ruinous sorrows:<br/>

let ship and crew sail true, with me as leader.<br/>

You read your Ovid then, when you learnt about love:<br/>

now the same Ovid’s to be read by you.<br/>

The public champion, I lighten hearts constrained<br/>

by their masters: each of you, thank the rod that frees.<br/>

Phoebus, source of the power of medicine and song,<br/>

may your laurel help me, I beg of you, as I begin,<br/>

Yours is the nurturing of doctor and poet alike:<br/>

the protection of both falls to your care.<br/>

***<br/>

## Part II: Treat it Early: Fill Your Time with War or Law<br/>
If you’ve regrets, and moderate emotions touch your heart,<br/>

then halt your feet, while you can, at the first threshold.<br/>

Crush the evil germs of sudden illness while they’re young,<br/>

and prevent your horse’s gallop at the start.<br/>

For time gives strength, time ripens tender grapes,<br/>

and creates healthy crops from what were shoots.<br/>

The tree that spreads wide shadows for passers-by,<br/>

was only a slip at first that had been planted:<br/>

then a hand could pluck it from the topsoil:<br/>

now by its growth it stands, in all its immense power.<br/>

Let your swift mind encompass what it is that you love,<br/>

and withdraw your neck from the collar that hurts you.<br/>

Halt its beginnings: it’s too late for the doctor to be called,<br/>

when the illness has grown stronger through delay.<br/>

But hurry, don’t put it off to a later time:<br/>

who’s not ready today, will be less so tomorrow:<br/>

all love deceives, and gains nourishment by waiting:<br/>

every next day is the best for freedom.<br/>

You see few rivers flow from mighty fountains:<br/>

by many inflowing waters they’re multiplied.<br/>

Myrrha , if you’d realised sooner what sins you’d begun,<br/>

you’d not have hidden your face with tree-bark.<br/>

I’ve seen a wound that could at first be healed<br/>

suffer harm through enduring long delays.<br/>

But since it charms us to cull the fruits of Venus,<br/>

we always say: ‘the same could happen tomorrow.’<br/>

Meanwhile the secret flames creep into our heart,<br/>

and the baleful tree drives its roots deeper.<br/>

If the moment for early help’s been lost, however,<br/>

and ancient love’s settled in the captive breast,<br/>

the greater the work that remains: but because I’ve been called<br/>

to the illness later, it won’t be abandoned by me.<br/>

That bit of Philoctetes that was wounded<br/>

he should surely have cut off long ago:<br/>

they say that, having been healed, many years later<br/>

he dealt the last blow of the Trojan war.<br/>

I who rushed to drive off the nascent illness,<br/>

now calmly bring you late relief.<br/>

Either you try, if you can, to quench a fire at the start,<br/>

or when it dies down, through its own violence:<br/>

while passion’s in full flow, give way to the rush of passion:<br/>

all of us find approaching its onrush difficult.<br/>

He’s a foolish swimmer, who fights against the stream,<br/>

when he could descend the current obliquely.<br/>

The impatient spirit, that’s not yet tractable, rejects my art,<br/>

and is possessed by hatred for my words of advice.<br/>

Better for me to approach him now when he’ll let me touch<br/>

the wound, and is more suited to words of truth.<br/>

Who’d stop a mother weeping, unless he’s mad,<br/>

at her son’s grave? That’s not the place to admonish her.<br/>

When tears are over, and the sorrowful spirit’s done,<br/>

then grief can be given expression in words.<br/>

Medicine requires the art of timing: given at the right time<br/>

wine may help, at the wrong time it may harm.<br/>

Indeed you may even inflame and provoke the disease<br/>

by denying it, if it’s not applied at the proper moment.<br/>

So when you’re ready for my medical arts,<br/>

first ban idleness, on my advice.<br/>

This encourages you to love, and protects the love it encourages:<br/>

it’s the pleasurable source, and the evil nourishment.<br/>

If you take away idleness, Cupid’s bow’s unstrung,<br/>

his torch is dark and held to scorn.<br/>

As plane trees like wine, as poplar trees like water,<br/>

as muddy reeds like the marshy ground,<br/>

so Venus loves idleness: you who seek to end love,<br/>

love gives way to business: be busy, you’ll be safe.<br/>

Languor and excess sleep that go unchallenged,<br/>

and gambling, and time lost to too much drink<br/>

take away all vigour, without damaging the heart:<br/>

insidious Love enters the unwary.<br/>

That Boy’s accustomed to following idleness: he hates the busy:<br/>

give your vacant mind work to occupy it.<br/>

There are the courts, the laws, the friends you might defend:<br/>

make your way through the splendid camp of city togas.<br/>

Or admire the youthful service of blood-drenched Mars:<br/>

then you’ll turn your back on your delights.<br/>

Behold, the fleeing Parthian, fresh cause of a great triumph,<br/>

he sees Caesar’s weapons now in his own country:<br/>

Conquer both the arrows of Cupid and Parthia,<br/>

and bring back twin trophies to your native gods.<br/>

As soon as Venus was wounded by Diomede’s spear,<br/>

she ordered the war to be fought by her lover.<br/>

You ask what made Aegisthus an adulterer?<br/>

the reason’s obvious: it was idleness.<br/>

Others fought the long battles with Troy:<br/>

Greece had sent over all her fighting men.<br/>

If he’d wanted acts of war, there were none to be had:<br/>

if the courts of law, Argos was free of quarrels.<br/>

He did what he could, he loved: better than doing nothing.<br/>

So the Boy comes, and so the Boy stays.<br/>
***<br/>

## Part III: You Can Also Farm, Hunt, or Travel<br/>

Country matters too delight the spirit, and the study<br/>

of agriculture. Any care will give way to those cares.<br/>

Order tame bulls to bow beneath the collar,<br/>

to furrow the hard soil with the curving blade:<br/>

sow the seed for your harvest, in the earth you’ve ploughed,<br/>

seed that the field will return to you with interest.<br/>

See the branches bowed with the weight of apples,<br/>

so the tree hardly bears the weight it carries.<br/>

See the flowing streams with happy murmurs:<br/>

see the sheep grazing on the fertile grass.<br/>

Behold, the goats seek the rocks and steep boulders:<br/>

soon they’ll bring back full udders for their kids:<br/>

The shepherd blows a melody on his reed pipes,<br/>

no lack of dogs for company, a watchful crowd.<br/>

Lowing sounds from another part of the high wood,<br/>

and a mother complains the loss of her calf.<br/>

Don’t the swarm fly, when you smoke them out,<br/>

to take the honey from the arching hive?<br/>

Autumn gives its apples: summer is lovely with harvest:<br/>

spring offers flowers: winter’s eased with fire.<br/>

The farmer picks ripe grapes at the right time,<br/>

and the juice flows under his bare feet.<br/>

At the right time he binds the cut grasses,<br/>

and sweeps the stubble soil with wide comb.<br/>

You yourself can plant seedlings in your watered gardens,<br/>

you yourself can guide gentle streams of water.<br/>

Grafting comes: make a branch adopt a branch,<br/>

and the tree stands there concealed by strange foliage.<br/>

When once the mind begins to enjoy these pleasures,<br/>

Vain Love departs on weakened wings.<br/>

Or you can cultivate the art of hunting: often Venus<br/>

retreated in shame from her conquering sister Phoebe.<br/>

Now hunt the headlong hare with keen-scented dog,<br/>

now spread your nets across the leafy hills,<br/>

or fright the quivering deer with motley scares,<br/>

or the boar’s brought down, stabbed by your hostile spear.<br/>

Sleep at night, not desire for girls, welcomes the weary man,<br/>

and the limbs will be restored by calm rest.<br/>

Easier work, but still work, is capturing birds<br/>

following the humble prize with net or lime,<br/>

or, what greedy fish might swallow with eager jaws,<br/>

hiding a curved hook under a little bait.<br/>

This pursuit or that, till you forget your passion,<br/>

you’ve got to secretly beguile yourself.<br/>

You only need to journey far, though strong chains<br/>

hold you back, and start to travel distant ways:<br/>

you’ll cry, and your lost girl’s name will oppose it,<br/>

and your feet will often stop you on the road:<br/>

but the less you wish to go, the more you should go:<br/>

endure it, and force unwilling feet to run.<br/>

Don’t hope for rain, or a foreign Sabbath, to delay you,<br/>

nor the River Allia noted for its losses.<br/>

Don’t ask how many miles you’ve done, and how many<br/>

there are left: nor feign delays so you can stay around:<br/>

Don’t count the hours, or keep looking back at Rome,<br/>

but fly: the Parthian flying from the enemy’s safe.<br/>

Some might call my advice hard: it’s hard, I acknowledge:<br/>

but you have to endure a lot of pain to be well.<br/>

Often when sick, unwillingly, I’ve drunk bitter juices,<br/>

and denied all food to my pleadings.<br/>

To save your body, you’ll endure fire and steel,<br/>

won’t relieve your dry thirsting mouth with water:<br/>

to heal your mind, what would you not accept?<br/>

So that part is worth more than the body.<br/>

Still, the entrance to my art is very gloomy,<br/>

and the greatest task’s to survive the first few hours.<br/>

You see how the collar at first chafes new bullocks,<br/>

and a new girth irritates a fast steed?<br/>

Perhaps you’ll be sorry to leave your fathers’ home:<br/>

but all the same you’ll leave: then want to return:<br/>

not your father’s home but love for your little friend,<br/>

will call you back, fine words excusing your crime.<br/>

When once you’ve gone, the countryside, your comrades,<br/>

the long road, give you a hundred solaces for your cares.<br/>

And don’t think it’s enough just to leave: stay away a while,<br/>

till the ashes have lost their power with their flame.<br/>

because unless, in hurrying back, your mind is strong,<br/>

rebellious love will fight you with cruel weapons.<br/>

And however long you’re away, you’ll return hungry and thirsty,<br/>

and the interval will have done you nothing but harm.<br/>

Part IV: But Forget Witchcraft!<br/>
If anyone thinks he can be helped by harmful herbs,<br/>

and magic arts, from Thessalian lands, that’s his affair.<br/>

That’s the old way of witchcraft: my Apollo<br/>

offers innocent aid with sacred song.<br/>

With me in charge no spirits will be ordered from their graves,<br/>

no witch, with wicked spells, will split the ground:<br/>

no crops will skip from one field to another,<br/>

nor Phoebus’s orb suddenly grow pale.<br/>

As usual, Tiber’s waters will run down to the sea:<br/>

as usual, the Moon will ride on snow-white horses.<br/>

No pains will be charmed away to ease the heart,<br/>

conquering love won’t be put to flight by burning sulphur.<br/>

What use, Medea, to you were herbs of Colchis,<br/>

when you desired to stay in your father’s house?<br/>

Circe, what profit to you were Perse’s magic plants<br/>

when his breeze took Ulysses’s ships away?<br/>

You did everything that your cunning guest might not go:<br/>

Love settled deep in your unwilling heart.<br/>

You could change men into a thousand shapes,<br/>

you could not change the commands of your heart.<br/>

Indeed it’s said that when he wished to leave<br/>

you stopped the lord of Ithaca with these words:<br/>

‘I don’t pray now for what I recall, that I used to hope for,<br/>

that you might wish to be my husband:<br/>

and yet I might be thought worthy of being your wife,<br/>

who am a goddess, daughter of the mighty Sun.<br/>

I beg you not to hurry: I ask a little time as a gift:<br/>

what less could I ask for in my prayers?<br/>

And you see the waves are high, and you ought to fear them:<br/>

later the wind will better suit your sails.<br/>

What reason have you for flight? No new Troy rises here,<br/>

no one calls their allies to arms again.<br/>

Here are love and peace, where I alone am badly wounded,<br/>

and the land will be safe in future under your rule.’<br/>

While this was spoken, Ulysses loosed his ships:<br/>

carrying away her fruitless words on familiar sails.<br/>

Circe was inflamed, and turned to her usual arts,<br/>

but love was still not lessened by them.<br/>

So whoever you are who call for help from my art,<br/>

put no faith in witchcraft and incantations.<br/>

Part V: Contemplate her Defects<br/>
If some overriding reason keeps you in the City,<br/>

(that mistress!), accept my advice from the City.<br/>

He’s his own best liberator who snaps the chains<br/>

that hurt his heart, and ends the grief forever.<br/>

But the man who’s brave as that, I marvel at it, and him,<br/>

and say: ‘He’ll not act out my prophecies.’<br/>

It’s you, who love, and can scarcely forget your loving,<br/>

that wish to, but can’t, who must be taught by me.<br/>

Tell yourself often what your wicked girl has done,<br/>

and before your eyes place every hurt you’ve had.<br/>

‘She’s had this and that, but she’s not satisfied with plunder:<br/>

the greedy girl’s given the household gods notice to quit.<br/>

She swore to me, and, having sworn so, deceived me,<br/>

lying stretched out so often at her door!<br/>

She prizes others, despises my love: ah,<br/>

a pedlar has nights with her, she won’t give me!’<br/>

Let all this embitter your every feeling:<br/>

recall it, look here for the seeds of your dislike.<br/>

And I want you to be fluent in them as well!<br/>

Suffer enough: you’ll be eloquent yourself.<br/>

Recently my affections clung to a certain girl:<br/>

she was not conducive to my spirit:<br/>

sick, Podalirius was cured by his own drugs,<br/>

and, I confess, I was a shamefully sick doctor.<br/>

It helped to continually dwell on my friend’s faults,<br/>

and it often was the thing that made me better.<br/>

‘How ugly,’ I’d say ‘my girl’s legs are!’<br/>

and yet they weren’t, if the truth be told.<br/>

‘How little are my girl’s arms beautiful!’<br/>

and yet they were, if the truth be told.<br/>

‘How small she is!’ she wasn’t: ‘How much she asks of a lover!’<br/>

That was the main cause of my dislike.<br/>

And the bad is neighbour to the good: in that confusion<br/>

virtue often bears the guilt for vice.<br/>

As much as you can, disparage your girl’s attractions,<br/>

and let your judgement fall a little short.<br/>

Let her be called ‘plump’ if she’s full-figured, ‘black’ if she’s dark:<br/>

in slenderness there’s the charge of being ‘lean’.<br/>

And she can be called ‘pert’, who’s not naive,<br/>

and she can be called ‘naive’, if she’s too honest.<br/>

Then too, whatever talents your woman lacks,<br/>

promote those, with flattering words and prayers.<br/>

Demand the use of song, if the girl’s bereft of voice:<br/>

make her dance if she doesn’t know how to move her hands.<br/>

Her speech is barbarous? Make her talk with you a lot:<br/>

she hasn’t learnt to sweep the chords? Ask for the lyre.<br/>

She walks awkwardly? Make her walk up and down:<br/>

Her chest’s all breasts? Let no bindings hide the fault.<br/>

If her teeth are bad, relate what she’ll laugh at:<br/>

Her eyes are sensitive? Report what makes her cry.<br/>

And appear suddenly, when she’s applied no make-up to herself,<br/>

having hastened your steps to your lady in the dawn.<br/>

We’re carried away by adornment: in gold and gems<br/>

all’s hidden: the least part of it’s the girl herself.<br/>

You often ask where what you love is amongst it all:<br/>

rich Love deceives the eyes with all that armour.<br/>

Be there unexpectedly, safe, you catch her defenceless:<br/>

the poor girl’s undone by her faults.<br/>

But it’s still not safe to trust in this rule too much:<br/>

since true beauty without art beguiles many.<br/>

So approach your lady’s presence (don’t let modesty deter you)<br/>

when she’s smearing her cheeks with blended potions.<br/>

You’ll find little pots and a thousand coloured things,<br/>

and dripping greases flowing, over her warm breasts.<br/>

Those cosmetics smell like your table, Phineus:<br/>

more than once they’ve made my stomach sick.<br/>

Part VI: Now About Sex<br/>
Now I’ll speak openly, about what I should offer, regarding<br/>

your sexual practice: love must be wholly driven away.<br/>

There’s much of this in fact that it’s shameful for me to say:<br/>

but with wit you’ll understand more than my words.<br/>

For lately there’s been a sort of slandering of my books,<br/>

of which the criticism is my Muse is insolent.<br/>

While I please in my way, while I’m sung throughout the world,<br/>

those few can attack my work as much as they like.<br/>

Envy disparages the genius of mighty Homer:<br/>

because of it Zoilus the critic (who was he?) has a name.<br/>

And sacrilegious tongues have savaged your poem, Virgil,<br/>

you who led the conquered gods here, carried from Troy.<br/>

Envy seeks the summits: wind blows across the heights:<br/>

the lightning seeks the summits, flung from Jove’s right hand.<br/>

But you, whoever you are, whom my licence offends,<br/>

if you’re wise, consider everything in context.<br/>

Manly warfare rejoices to be told in Homeric measure:<br/>

what place can there be in that for our delights?<br/>

Tragedians sound sublimely: rage suits the tragic heights:<br/>

from public life comedy’s realised.<br/>

The frank iambic is unsheathed against our enemies,<br/>

either as swift-paced trimeter, or dragging its last foot.<br/>

Let smooth-tongued Elegy sing Cupids with their quivers,<br/>

and play the gentle mistress, as she decides.<br/>

Achilles is not spoken of in Callimachus’s rhythms,<br/>

sweet Cydippe’s not for your mouth Homer.<br/>

Who could stand Andromache’s part performed by Thais?<br/>

Whoever acted Andromache in Thais’s role would err.<br/>

Thais is in my art: liberated playfulness is mine:<br/>

I’ve nothing to do with wives: it’s Thais in my art.<br/>

If my Muse corresponds to light-hearted matters, I’ve won,<br/>

and the case against the defendant’s a false charge.<br/>

Gluttonous Envy, burst: my name’s well known already:<br/>

it will be more so, if only my feet travel the road they’ve started.<br/>

But you’re in too much of a hurry: if I live you’ll be more than sorry:<br/>

many poems, in fact, are forming in my mind.<br/>

Now I’m happy, and my enthusiasm for fame grows with my esteem:<br/>

my stallion’s panting for the start of the climb.<br/>

It’s acknowledged the elegy owes as much to me,<br/>

as the epic owes to famous Virgil.<br/>

So far I’ve answered Envy: tighten the reins<br/>

more resolutely, and ride your course out, poet.<br/>

So when you’re headed for bed and youthful labour,<br/>

and the time of night she promised you is near,<br/>

lest your girl’s charms, if you spend you whole self on her,<br/>

captivate you, I’d like you to do it as much as you want to first.<br/>

Take as much as you want, where your initial pleasure can end:<br/>

after the first the next will be much more sluggish.<br/>

Sex postponed is most welcome: sunlight’s delighted<br/>

by the cold, shade by sun, water’s welcome in a drought.<br/>

I speak but I’m ashamed: make love too in a position<br/>

that you think makes love least likely, and becoming.<br/>

It’s not hard to do: few truthful girls confess even to themselves<br/>

that there’s nothing they think unbecoming to them.<br/>

Then too order all the windows to be opened,<br/>

and note her worst features in broad daylight.<br/>

As soon as pleasure’s reached the finishing post,<br/>

and the spirit lies there exhausted, and the whole body,<br/>

while you’re repenting, and you’d rather never have touched<br/>

a girl, and you don’t think you’re going to touch one for years,<br/>

then impress your mind with whatever’s wrong with her body,<br/>

and keep your eyes fixed all the time on those faults.<br/>

Perhaps someone might call these things trivial (as they are too),<br/>

but what has no benefit on its own, is useful in numbers.<br/>

And a little viper may kill a vast bull with its bite:<br/>

the boar is often gripped by a not very large hound.<br/>

You should only fight in strength, and assemble<br/>

all my rules together: from many one large heap will be made.<br/>

There are so many methods, so many positions<br/>

there’s no need to give them, all in my opinion.<br/>

The action that won’t offend your feelings,<br/>

to another’s judgement will seem a crime.<br/>

One man who saw the sexual organs on a naked body,<br/>

brought his lovemaking, that was in progress, to a halt:<br/>

one, on his girl’s rising from Love’s affairs,<br/>

considered those shameful tokens, in the stained bed.<br/>

O, you’re just playing at it, if those things bother you:<br/>

your heart is being breathed on by tepid flames.<br/>

Let that Boy draw the straining bow more strongly:<br/>

you’ll look for greater help for a mass of wounds.<br/>

What about the man who hid secretly to observe a girl,<br/>

and saw indecent things that custom forbids us seeing?<br/>

The gods forbid that I advise anyone to do such things!<br/>

While they might help, they just aren’t suitable.<br/>

Part VII: Have More Than One Lover<br/>
I also urge you to have two girls at once<br/>

(You’re very brave if you could consider more):<br/>

When the heart’s divided it goes in both directions,<br/>

and one love saps the power of the other.<br/>

Vast rivers are thinned out through many channels:<br/>

fierce flames die down when the fuel’s removed.<br/>

One anchor’s not enough to hold a well-waxed hull,<br/>

a single hook’s not enough in clear water:<br/>

Who long ago arranged a double solace for himself,<br/>

long ago was victor on the highest summit.<br/>

But you, who were foolishly trusting of one mistress,<br/>

at least now a fresh love is to be contrived for you.<br/>

Minos quenched the fires of Pasiphae in Procris:<br/>

Cleopatra, Phineus’s first wife, left, conquered by Idaea.<br/>

Callirhoe made Alcmaeon share her bed<br/>

lest he always love Alphesiboea.<br/>

And Oenone would have held Paris, to the end of time,<br/>

if she’d not been harmed by Helen, her Spartan rival.<br/>

His wife Procne’s beauty would have pleased Tereus:<br/>

but Philomela, her imprisoned sister, was more beautiful.<br/>

Why dwell on more examples, a crowd that tires me?<br/>

Every love’s defeated by a fresh successor.<br/>

A mother loses one son of many more resolutely,<br/>

than one in tears who cries: ‘You were my only son.’<br/>

But don’t think I’m writing new rules for you<br/>

(and I wish these discoveries added to my glory!)<br/>

Agamemnon witnessed it (what did he not see, in fact,<br/>

he who was in command of all the Greeks?)<br/>

The conqueror loved Chryseis, captured in the war:<br/>

but her old father wept everywhere, foolishly.<br/>

Why weep, so annoyingly, old man? They suit each other well:<br/>

you wound you daughter, tactlessly, with your attentions.<br/>

When Calchas, later, safe, under Achilles’s protection, ordered<br/>

she be returned, and she was received by her father’s house,<br/>

Agamemnon said: ‘There’s one Briseis, close to her in beauty,<br/>

and, if you allow for the first syllable, her name’s the same:<br/>

If he’s wise, Achilles will hand her over to me, in lieu:<br/>

if he doesn’t, he’ll experience my power.<br/>

If your actions show mine to be at fault in this, you Greeks,<br/>

there’s something, a powerful sceptre, grasped in my hand.<br/>

For if I’m king, and no girl sleeps beside me, then it’s right<br/>

that impudent Thersites take my kingship.’<br/>

He spoke, and had, from her, much solace for the first girl,<br/>

and love was laid aside, driven out by new love.<br/>

So, from Agamemnon’s example, take up with new flames,<br/>

in order for your love to be distracted, in twin directions.<br/>

You ask, where you can find her? Read my works:<br/>

you’ll soon possess a boatload of girls.<br/>

Part VIII: Be Cool With Her<br/>
But if my suggestions have value, if Apollo<br/>

through my mouth teaches all to mortal men,<br/>

though, unhappy man, you’re roasting in the midst of Etna,<br/>

make it seem to your girl that you’re chillier than ice:<br/>

and if you’re grieving deeply, look happy, lest she see it,<br/>

and laugh, when tears come to you.<br/>

Not that I order you to break off in mid-sorrow:<br/>

my commands aren’t as cruel as that.<br/>

Pretend to what is not, and that the passion’s over,<br/>

so you’ll become, in truth, what you are studying to be.<br/>

I’ve often wished to seem asleep, lest it seem I’ve been drinking,<br/>

while I seemed so, I gave my conquered eyes to sleep:<br/>

I’ve laughed at one caught, who pretended to himself he was in love,<br/>

hunting birds, but fallen into his own net.<br/>

Love penetrates the heart by habit, through habit it’s forgotten:<br/>

he who can imagine he’s well, will be well.<br/>

She might ask you to come: go on the night agreed:<br/>

you’ve come, and the door is locked: well endure it.<br/>

Don’t speak fawning words, or abuse the doorpost,<br/>

nor lay your body on the hard threshold.<br/>

The new day will dawn: lose your words of grievance,<br/>

and show no signs of suffering in your face.<br/>

She’ll soon drop her disdain, when she sees your indifference:<br/>

this too’s a gift you’ll gather from my art.<br/>

Still, deceive yourself as well, don’t let there be a plan<br/>

to stop loving: the horse will often fight against the bit.<br/>

Conceal your advantage: what’s not declared will be:<br/>

the bird avoids the net that’s too apparent.<br/>

Don’t let her be too pleased with herself, nor have the power<br/>

to despise you: be brave, so she gives way to your bravery.<br/>

The door’s wide open? Though you’re called to, pass by.<br/>

There’s a night agreed? Hesitate to go on the given night.<br/>

To be able to endure it’s easy, when, if patience fails,<br/>

it’s fine to take your enjoyment with easy girls.<br/>

Part IX: Or Sate Yourself With Her<br/>
And who can call my suggestions difficult?<br/>

Look, I even play the matchmaker’s role.<br/>

For since hearts vary, let me vary my arts:<br/>

there are a thousand kinds of illness, a thousand kinds of health.<br/>

Some people are barely relieved by sharp knives:<br/>

while herbs and juices are a help to many.<br/>

You’re too weak, unable to go, tenderly bound,<br/>

and cruel Love presses your neck beneath his foot?<br/>

Stop struggling: let your sails be brought before the wind,<br/>

where the tide calls, let your oars travel too,<br/>

That thirst’s to be quenched, by which you’re desperately parched:<br/>

I allow it: it’s fine now to drink from mid-stream:<br/>

but drink even more than your heart demands,<br/>

make your throat overflow, full of the water you’ve taken.<br/>

Go, and enjoy your girl, any time, nothing’s forbidden:<br/>

let her steal away your nights and days.<br/>

Seek loathing for your sickness: and let loathing end it.<br/>

Now, too, when you believe you could be free, stay on,<br/>

till you’re quite overwhelmed, and abundance destroys love,<br/>

and disgusted you’ve no pleasure in her house.<br/>

Love’s also lasting when mistrust feeds it:<br/>

if you seek to relinquish it, relinquish fear.<br/>

He who fears lest she’s not his, and someone’s taken her away,<br/>

he’ll scarcely be made well with Machaon’s help.<br/>

Generally a mother loves the one of her two sons best,<br/>

whose return she’s fearful for, because he bears arms.<br/>

Part X: Forget Her, and Don’t Be Alone<br/>
There’s an ancient shrine by the Colline Gate:<br/>

Venus of high Eryx gives her name to the shrine:<br/>

Lethean Love lives there, who heals the heart,<br/>

and adds his torches to the chilly water.<br/>

and it’s there the young men pray they might forget,<br/>

and the girls captivated by hard-hearted men.<br/>

He spoke to me in these words (I’m not sure if it was Cupid<br/>

truly, or a dream: but I think it was a dream):<br/>

‘O you who now incite love, and now quell it,<br/>

add this one, Ovid, to your maxims too.<br/>

He who calls to mind his ills, kills love:<br/>

the god gives more or less of those to all.<br/>

Let him who fears the swift months, and the money-lenders,<br/>

torment himself with the whole sum he’s borrowed:<br/>

who has a hard-hearted father, though his other prayers prosper,<br/>

let him have that hard-hearted father before his eyes:<br/>

This poor man living with an ill-dowered wife,<br/>

let him believe his wife has harmed his fate.<br/>

Have you, on a fine estate, fertile vineyards,<br/>

full of vines? Fear, lest the new-born grapes are scorched.<br/>

You have a ship returning: think of ever-hostile seas<br/>

and the losses littering the vile shore.<br/>

Let a soldier son, you, and you, a marriageable daughter torment:<br/>

and who hasn’t reason for a thousand sorrows?<br/>

So you could hate her, Paris, you should have kept<br/>

your brothers’ deaths before your eyes.’<br/>

Still speaking, the boyish image departed<br/>

from my gentle sleep, if sleep it was.<br/>

What to do? Palinurus slips from the ship in mid-ocean:<br/>

I’m forced to sail on unknown ways.<br/>

You who love, beware lonely places, lonely places are harmful!<br/>

Why flee? You can be safer in a crowd.<br/>

You don’t need secrecy (secrecy nurtures passion):<br/>

in future it’s the crowd that will assist you.<br/>

If you’re alone, you’ll be sad, and the form of the girl you’ve left<br/>

will be there before your eyes, so like herself.<br/>

Because of that, night’s sadder than the daylight:<br/>

your crowd of friends missing, who might ease the gloom.<br/>

Don’t shun conversation, or let your door be closed,<br/>

don’t hide your tearful face in the shadows.<br/>

Always have some Pylades, to support Orestes:<br/>

here too the benefit of friendship is not slight.<br/>

What but the lonely woods caused harm to Phyllis?<br/>

The cause of her death is certain: she had no friend.<br/>

She went as the Thracian Bacchae go, marking the festival,<br/>

a savage troop of women with streaming hair,<br/>

and now, wherever she could, gazed at the distant sea,<br/>

now threw herself down exhausted on sandy earth.<br/>

‘Faithless Demophoon!’ She cried to the dumb waves,<br/>

and her words were spoken punctuated by sobs.<br/>

There was a narrow path darkened by long shadows,<br/>

by which she often took her way to the shore.<br/>

The poor girl traversed it nine times: and said: ‘I’ll show him!’<br/>

and with pallid face looked up at the branches, and gazed<br/>

down at her belt: uncertain, shrinking from what she might dare,<br/>

and from fear, and lifting her fingers to her neck.<br/>

Thracian girl, I wish you’d not been so alone then: the trees<br/>

might not have wept for Phyllis, by shedding their leaves.<br/>

Fear too much seclusion, with Phyllis as your example,<br/>

men who’ve been hurt by women, girls by men.<br/>

Part XI: Now, Keep Away From Her<br/>
One young man performed whatever my Muse<br/>

commanded: and his life was nearly safe:<br/>

he relapsed, he’d come among some passionate lovers,<br/>

and Love picked up the weapons he’d laid down.<br/>

If you love, but don’t wish to, avoid making contact:<br/>

it’s often accustomed to harm cattle too.<br/>

When eyes look at wounds they’re also wounded,<br/>

and many things harm our bodies through infection.<br/>

Not infrequently into an arid place with parched soil,<br/>

water permeates from a stream flowing nearby:<br/>

Hidden love permeates, if you don’t depart your lover:<br/>

and in this we’re all an ingenious crowd.<br/>

Another man was already cured: being near harmed him:<br/>

he couldn’t bear any meeting with his mistress.<br/>

The wound, poorly healed, reopened at the old scar,<br/>

and not one of my arts had the least success.<br/>

Houses are barely defended from a neighbouring fire:<br/>

it’s best to keep away from places nearby.<br/>

Don’t take your walks in the colonnade where she’s<br/>

accustomed to: and don’t adorn the same functions.<br/>

What pleasure for a tepid heart to be rekindled by memory?<br/>

If you can do, you should find another sphere.<br/>

It’s not easy if you’re hungry to hold back from a laid table,<br/>

and splashing water rouses a huge thirst.<br/>

It’s not easy to restrain the bull that’s seen the heifer,<br/>

the stallion always whinnies strongly when he sees the mare.<br/>

When you’ve done all that, for you still to reach dry land,<br/>

it’s not enough for you to leave the girl.<br/>

Say goodbye to mother, sister, and the nurse who’s in the know,<br/>

and whoever plays any part in your girl’s life.<br/>

Don’t let her slave come by, or her maid, with lying tears,<br/>

humbly saying: ‘Greetings!’ in their mistress’s name.<br/>

And if you want to know what she’s doing, still, don’t ask:<br/>

endure! It will profit you to hold your tongue.<br/>

You too, who relate the reason why your love ended,<br/>

and make so many complaints against your mistress,<br/>

beware of it: it’s better to revenge yourself by silence,<br/>

so she’ll vanish from your longing.<br/>

And I’d rather you were silent than say that you’ve left off:<br/>

he who says: ‘I’m not in love’, too often, is.<br/>

But put faith more in love being extinguished slowly<br/>

than suddenly: slowly abandon it, you’ll be safe.<br/>

The deluge may run higher than the settled river:<br/>

but all the same it won’t last, while the other’s permanent water.<br/>

Let love fail, and, vanishing, dissolve into thin air,<br/>

and let it fade away in gentle stages.<br/>

But it’s wrong to hate the girl you loved, in any way:<br/>

that conclusion suits uncivilised natures.<br/>

It’s enough not to care: who ends his love by hating,<br/>

is either still in love, or finds it hard to leave off being sorry.<br/>

Shame for a man and woman, once joined, now to be enemies:<br/>

Appian Venus, near the Court, herself frowns on those quarrels.<br/>

Often they’re defendants, and still love: while no dispute<br/>

has really occurred, love’s strayed without a warning.<br/>

By chance I took on one young client: a litter held the wife:<br/>

his every word was bristling with cruel threats.<br/>

Intending to have her bound over, then bailed, he said:<br/>

‘she ought to step down’: she did: seeing her he fell silent:<br/>

his hands dropped, his double-tablets (the security) with them:<br/>

he fell into her embrace, and said: ‘You win.’<br/>

It’s safer, and more fitting, to separate, in peace,<br/>

and not search out the law-court from the bedroom.<br/>

Tell her to keep the gifts you gave her, without any ruling:<br/>

small losses are usually a major gain.<br/>

But if some chance brings you together again,<br/>

keep in mind all the weapons I’ve given you.<br/>

Now you need my weapons: here, brave man’s a fight:<br/>

Penthesilea’s to be conquered by your spear.<br/>

Now let your rivals come to mind, now the lover’s hard threshold<br/>

now the useless promises she made amongst the gods.<br/>

Don’t comb your hair because you’re going to meet her,<br/>

don’t wear your toga free to catch her eye.<br/>

She’s nothing, so please yourself, and care for other girls,<br/>

let her be just one of many, to you, now.<br/>

Part XII: Don’t Weaken<br/>
But I’ll tell you what specially obstructs our efforts,<br/>

and everyone can learn by his own example.<br/>

We give way slowly, because we hope to be loved:<br/>

since each is pleased with himself, we’re a credulous crowd.<br/>

And don’t believe that words carry any weight,<br/>

(well what’s more deceptive?) or the eternal gods.<br/>

And beware that girls’ tears don’t move you:<br/>

their eyes have been instructed how to cry.<br/>

Innumerable arts oppose a lover’s willpower,<br/>

as the waves beat on the rocks from every side.<br/>

Don’t let the cause be known why you prefer divorce:<br/>

don’t say what grieves you: just grieve silently the while.<br/>

Don’t recall her sins, lest she dilutes them: favour yourself,<br/>

so that your own cause is better than hers.<br/>

Who’s silent is strong: who pours abuse on his girl,<br/>

is only accusing himself, for his own satisfaction.<br/>

I wouldn’t dare steal Love’s arrows like Ulysses,<br/>

nor, having snatched his torches, quench them in the stream:<br/>

nor would I ever clip the Boy’s bright wings,<br/>

nor by my art slacken his sacred bow.<br/>

It’s wisdom, whatever I sing: heed the singing,<br/>

and you, health-giving Apollo, support my work: be here.<br/>

Apollo is here: to the sound of quiver and lyre:<br/>

I know the god by his emblems: Apollo’s here.<br/>

Compare wool dyed in the bronze cauldrons of Sparta<br/>

with Tyrian purple: it will be less beautiful:<br/>

compare your girl too with all the beauties:<br/>

each man will start to be ashamed of his girl:<br/>

to Paris the other goddesses might have seemed lovely,<br/>

but, compared with those beside her, Venus won.<br/>

Don’t just compare the face, but their characters and skills:<br/>

so long as love doesn’t cloud your judgement.<br/>

Part XIII: Get Rid of all Reminders<br/>
It’s a trifle, what I sing next: but many have benefited<br/>

from that trifle: amongst whom I was one.<br/>

Don’t re-read the letters you’ve kept from your sweet girl:<br/>

re-reading letters shakes the steadfast heart.<br/>

Put them all in the fierce flames (you’ll hate to do it),<br/>

and say: ‘Let this be the funeral pyre for my passion.’<br/>

Althaea’s brand set Meleager, her absent son, on fire:<br/>

will you give false words to the flames reluctantly?<br/>

And remove the wax images of her, if you can: why weaken<br/>

at dumb likenesses? Once Laodamia died because of that.<br/>

And often places hurt you: flee the places where you slept<br/>

guiltily together: they’re a cause of grief:<br/>

‘Here she was, here she lay: we slept in this room:<br/>

here she granted me playful delights at night.’<br/>

Remembering reopens love, the wound’s newly re-opened:<br/>

trifling errors damage the weak-minded.<br/>

Consider how, if you touch ashes that are almost dead<br/>

with sulphur, they revive, and a tall flame comes from nothing.<br/>

So, if you don’t avoid whatever reawakens love,<br/>

the flames will light again that once were quenched.<br/>

The Greek ships must wish they’d fled Cape Caphereus,<br/>

while you, old man, take revenge with the light of your fires.<br/>

With Scylla past, the careful sailor’s happy:<br/>

you too beware places that were once too dear.<br/>

This is your quicksand of Syrtes: Acroceraunia’s living Cape:<br/>

here fatal Charybdis spews out the water she sucks in.<br/>

Part XIV: Avoid the Arts<br/>
There are things no one can command to order,<br/>

yet often by chance things happen that delight.<br/>

Let Phaedra lose her wealth, you’ll spare Hippolytus, Neptune,<br/>

the grandfather’s bull won’t scare the nephew’s horses.<br/>

Pasiphae rendered poor, would have loved more wisely:<br/>

voluptuous love is nurtured by riches.<br/>

Why did no woman court Irus, no man court Hecale<br/>

because the one was a beggar, and the other poor.<br/>

Poverty has nothing with which it can feed its love:<br/>

still it’s not worth wishing to be poor.<br/>

But there’s value in not indulging in the theatre,<br/>

till love’s truly vanished from your empty heart,<br/>

The zithers, and lutes and lyres unman you,<br/>

and the sound and waving limbs of the troupe.<br/>

There lovers’ parts are danced, continually:<br/>

the actor, with art shows, what delights: and what you must avoid.<br/>

I speak unwillingly now: don’t touch the tender poets!<br/>

Disloyally I banish even my own gifts.<br/>

Shun Callimachus: he’s no enemy of Love:<br/>

and as well as Callimachus, you Philetas do harm.<br/>

I’m certain Sappho made me sweeter on my lover,<br/>

and Anacreon’s Muse gave out no rigid rules.<br/>

Who can have read your songs, in safety, Tibullus,<br/>

or you, Propertius, whose work was Cynthia alone?<br/>

Who could depart harshly from reading Gallus?<br/>

And I’m not sure some such doesn’t sound in my songs too.<br/>

Part XV: Love your Rival<br/>
Unless Apollo, the patron of our work, deceives the poet,<br/>

rivalry’s the greatest cause that troubles us:<br/>

so don’t let yourself imagine any rival,<br/>

and best believe she lies in bed alone.<br/>

That’s why Orestes loved Hermione the more,<br/>

because she’d started to become another man’s.<br/>

Why grieve, Menelaus? You went wife-less to Crete,<br/>

and could do without your bride for all that while.<br/>

Not till Paris snatched her, did you miss your spouse:<br/>

through another’s love your own increased.<br/>

And, in Briseis’s abduction, it was this Achilles cried for,<br/>

the pleasure to Agamemnon of taking her.<br/>

Believe me he didn’t cry in vain: the son of Atreus took her,<br/>

who’d have been shamefully timid if he hadn’t.<br/>

Certainly I’d have taken her, and I’m no wiser than him:<br/>

she was the greatest reward of envy.<br/>

For he swore by his sceptre Briseis was untouched,<br/>

but he did not think the sceptre was a god.<br/>

May the gods let you shun the door of the girl you left behind,<br/>

and your feet be adequate to your resolve.<br/>

And you can: only have the will to hold on: go hard now,<br/>

now the task’s to plunge your spur into your swift horse.<br/>

Imagine in that lair are Lotos-eaters, Sirens:<br/>

add your oars’ effort now to your sails.<br/>

He also, who once grieved you with excessive rivalry,<br/>

I want you to stop thinking of him as an enemy.<br/>

Now, though you still hate him, you should certainly greet him:<br/>

as soon as you can kiss him you’ll be cured.<br/>

Part XVI: The Doctor’s Last Advice<br/>
Behold, there’s still your diet, to complete all the doctor’s duties,<br/>

I’ll give you what to swallow and avoid.<br/>

Italian onions, or the ones they send you, from the shores of Libya,<br/>

or the ones that come from Megara, every one will do you harm.<br/>

It’s no less fitting to avoid that lustful garden rocket,<br/>

and whatever readies these bodies of ours for making love.<br/>

Better to eat rue, which sharpens up the eyesight,<br/>

and whatever stops these bodies of ours from making love.<br/>

You ask what I teach about the gifts of Bacchus?<br/>

Expect to be enlightened, by my warnings, very briefly.<br/>

Wine prepares your heart for love, unless you take enough,<br/>

and your wits are stupefied, overcome by the neat juice.<br/>

By wind a fire is fed, by wind it is extinguished:<br/>

light breezes fan the flames, heavier gusts will kill them.<br/>

So don’t drink at all, or drink so much your cares all vanish:<br/>

if it’s anywhere between the two it’s bound to do you harm.<br/>

This work is done: hang garlands on my weary prow:<br/>

I’ve reached the port for which my course was set.<br/>

Soon you’ll say your holy prayers to the shrine of the poet,<br/>

men and women, healed by my song.<br/>

***

End of The Remedia Amoris<br/><br/>
这便是《爱的解药》的结尾<br/>




