## Part II: Treat it Early: Fill Your Time with War or Law<br/>
## 第二部分：及早治疗：用战争或法律填满你的时间

If you’ve regrets, and moderate emotions touch your heart,<br/>
如果你有遗憾，适度的情感触动了你的心，

then halt your feet, while you can, at the first threshold.<br/>
那么在你还能停下的时候，停在第一道门槛。

Crush the evil germs of sudden illness while they’re young,<br/>

and prevent your horse’s gallop at the start.<br/>

For time gives strength, time ripens tender grapes,<br/>

and creates healthy crops from what were shoots.<br/>

The tree that spreads wide shadows for passers-by,<br/>

was only a slip at first that had been planted:<br/>

then a hand could pluck it from the topsoil:<br/>

now by its growth it stands, in all its immense power.<br/>

Let your swift mind encompass what it is that you love,<br/>

and withdraw your neck from the collar that hurts you.<br/>

Halt its beginnings: it’s too late for the doctor to be called,<br/>

when the illness has grown stronger through delay.<br/>

But hurry, don’t put it off to a later time:<br/>

who’s not ready today, will be less so tomorrow:<br/>

all love deceives, and gains nourishment by waiting:<br/>

every next day is the best for freedom.<br/>

You see few rivers flow from mighty fountains:<br/>

by many inflowing waters they’re multiplied.<br/>

Myrrha , if you’d realised sooner what sins you’d begun,<br/>

you’d not have hidden your face with tree-bark.<br/>

I’ve seen a wound that could at first be healed<br/>

suffer harm through enduring long delays.<br/>

But since it charms us to cull the fruits of Venus,<br/>

we always say: ‘the same could happen tomorrow.’<br/>

Meanwhile the secret flames creep into our heart,<br/>

and the baleful tree drives its roots deeper.<br/>

If the moment for early help’s been lost, however,<br/>

and ancient love’s settled in the captive breast,<br/>

the greater the work that remains: but because I’ve been called<br/>

to the illness later, it won’t be abandoned by me.<br/>

That bit of Philoctetes that was wounded<br/>

he should surely have cut off long ago:<br/>

they say that, having been healed, many years later<br/>

he dealt the last blow of the Trojan war.<br/>

I who rushed to drive off the nascent illness,<br/>

now calmly bring you late relief.<br/>

Either you try, if you can, to quench a fire at the start,<br/>

or when it dies down, through its own violence:<br/>

while passion’s in full flow, give way to the rush of passion:<br/>

all of us find approaching its onrush difficult.<br/>

He’s a foolish swimmer, who fights against the stream,<br/>

when he could descend the current obliquely.<br/>

The impatient spirit, that’s not yet tractable, rejects my art,<br/>

and is possessed by hatred for my words of advice.<br/>

Better for me to approach him now when he’ll let me touch<br/>

the wound, and is more suited to words of truth.<br/>

Who’d stop a mother weeping, unless he’s mad,<br/>

at her son’s grave? That’s not the place to admonish her.<br/>

When tears are over, and the sorrowful spirit’s done,<br/>

then grief can be given expression in words.<br/>

Medicine requires the art of timing: given at the right time<br/>

wine may help, at the wrong time it may harm.<br/>

Indeed you may even inflame and provoke the disease<br/>

by denying it, if it’s not applied at the proper moment.<br/>

So when you’re ready for my medical arts,<br/>

first ban idleness, on my advice.<br/>

This encourages you to love, and protects the love it encourages:<br/>

it’s the pleasurable source, and the evil nourishment.<br/>

If you take away idleness, Cupid’s bow’s unstrung,<br/>

his torch is dark and held to scorn.<br/>

As plane trees like wine, as poplar trees like water,<br/>

as muddy reeds like the marshy ground,<br/>

so Venus loves idleness: you who seek to end love,<br/>

love gives way to business: be busy, you’ll be safe.<br/>

Languor and excess sleep that go unchallenged,<br/>

and gambling, and time lost to too much drink<br/>

take away all vigour, without damaging the heart:<br/>

insidious Love enters the unwary.<br/>

That Boy’s accustomed to following idleness: he hates the busy:<br/>

give your vacant mind work to occupy it.<br/>

There are the courts, the laws, the friends you might defend:<br/>

make your way through the splendid camp of city togas.<br/>

Or admire the youthful service of blood-drenched Mars:<br/>

then you’ll turn your back on your delights.<br/>

Behold, the fleeing Parthian, fresh cause of a great triumph,<br/>

he sees Caesar’s weapons now in his own country:<br/>

Conquer both the arrows of Cupid and Parthia,<br/>

and bring back twin trophies to your native gods.<br/>

As soon as Venus was wounded by Diomede’s spear,<br/>

she ordered the war to be fought by her lover.<br/>

You ask what made Aegisthus an adulterer?<br/>

the reason’s obvious: it was idleness.<br/>

Others fought the long battles with Troy:<br/>

Greece had sent over all her fighting men.<br/>

If he’d wanted acts of war, there were none to be had:<br/>

if the courts of law, Argos was free of quarrels.<br/>

He did what he could, he loved: better than doing nothing.<br/>

So the Boy comes, and so the Boy stays.<br/>

***

