# Kena Upanishad Commentary

```
Commentary on the Kena Upanishad–by Swami Nirmalananda Giri
```
# The Mover of the Moved

In the world we see a prime duality: cause and effect. Yet, we see no cause for the world itself. Inquiry
into its cause naturally arises. The lazy and the cowardly insist there is no cause and pursue their
exploitation of the world and its inhabitants. The worthy and the bold, however, seek to know. Many
are the theories set forth by profound thinkers. But those who have gone beyond thought into pure
knowing have unanimously told us of the cause, and in that insight have also come to perfectly
understand the effect–the world and all within it.

**The question**

The Kena Upanishad opens with a question that is answered in the rest of the upanishad.

“At whose behest does the mind think? Who bids the body live? Who makes the tongue speak? Who is
that effulgent Being that directs the eye to form and color and the ear to sound?”

This is one of the few philosophical questions that really matter, for if we come to the wrong
conclusion it will cloud, or even distort, our understanding of life. For example, if we say God, or
Nature, or happenstance, we will in essence be saying that we have nothing to do with our existence,
that a force far beyond us is making all this occur to us, that we are like seaweed being carried along on
the wave of the sea, able to yearn for situations and things but unable to bring anything about. If we are
theists we believe that if we somehow do the needful, in response God will give us what we want, but
still it will be his doing and beyond our capacity to accomplish or even hold on to once we have it. This
view of ourselves as utterly helpless and therefore utterly insignificant in the vast universe will cripple
and frustrate us, distorting us profoundly. You Are Nothing becomes the watchword of our life–a life
which bears that maxim out. Hopeless and helpless we drift along, controlled by everything that is
other than us. This is truly a living hell.

Into this darkness shines the realization embodied in the upanishads, a realization that we will
somehow recognize from deep within us, for that realization is ours on the inmost level of our
existence. We do not learn the truth–we recognize it.

All right, then: who makes the mind think, the body live, the faculty of speech to manifest, and causes
the senses to operate?

**The answer**


“The Self is ear of the ear, mind of the mind, speech of speech. He is also breath of the breath, and eye
of the eye. Having given up the false identification of the Self with the senses and the mind, and
knowing the Self to be Brahman, the wise, on departing this life, become immortal.”

The ear, mind, speech, breath, and eye are only instruments, only messengers. The one who causes
them to function, the hearer of hearing, the witness of the mind and thought, the understander of
speech, the source of the breath and the seer of seeing, is the Atman, the Self. External experience may
be illusory, but if we trace the illusion back and back to the perceiver of perception we will find the
reality that is the Self. In a motion picture we see so many images, so many illusions, but when the
picture stops we see the pure white screen that was behind it all the time, without which no picture
would have been possible. Such is the Self. Knowing the Self to be none other than Brahman, the
Absolute, rebirth is no more.

Swami Prabhavananda has translated the word dhira as “the wise,” but in actuality dhira means those
who are steadfast–in this instance those who are firmly established in the practice of yoga and in the
realization arising from yoga.

**Brahman the inexpressible**

Brahman is beyond all sensory perception or intellectual comprehension. Yet we can infer the existence
of Brahman by that which It causes to occur, by the consciousness that does perceive and comprehend.
So in conclusion the upanishad says this, which really needs little comment:

“Him the eye does not see, nor the tongue express, nor the mind grasp. Him we neither know nor are
able to teach.

“Different is he from the known, and different is he from the unknown. So have we heard from the
wise.

“That which cannot be expressed in words but by which the tongue speaks know that to be Brahman.
Brahman is not the being who is worshiped of men.

“That which is not comprehended by the mind but by which the mind comprehends–know that to be
Brahman. Brahman is not the being who is worshiped of men.

“That which is not seen by the eye but by which the eye sees–know that to be Brahman. Brahman is not
the being who is worshiped of men.

“That which is not heard by the ear but by which the ear hears–know that to be Brahman. Brahman is
not the being who is worshiped of men.

“That which is not drawn by the breath but by which the breath is drawn know that to be Brahman.
Brahman is not the being who is worshiped of men.”

When the upanishad says that we do not know Brahman, it refers to intellectual knowledge. Therefore,
as it continues, we cannot “teach” Brahman as an intellectual subject.

When it says that Brahman is different “from the unknown” it is not speaking of Brahman’s
unknowability, but rather that Brahman is not an unknown object that in time the intellect will come to
know.

The most striking part of this passage is the statement that “Brahman is not the being who is worshiped
of men.” This presents two significant points. First, that Brahman is not an object, but the Eternal


Subject, and consequently cannot be worshiped as an object. Second, “men” cannot relate to Brahman
at all, but those that have passed beyond all relative identity can experience Brahman as their own Self.

# Knowing that is Ignorance, and Unknowing

# That is Knowing

**At the beginning**

All classical commentators say that in this second part of the Kena Upanishad the first two verses are a
dialogue between a teacher and a student, and the remaining three verses are an exposition of the
discussion. First, the teacher says to the student:

“If you think that you know well the truth of Brahman, know that you know little. What you think to be
Brahman in your self, or what you think to be Brahman in the gods–that is not Brahman. What is
indeed the truth of Brahman you must therefore learn.”

The student responds:

“I cannot say that I know Brahman fully. Nor can I say that I know him not. He among us knows him
best who understands the spirit of the words: “Nor do I know that I know him not.”

To help us in this, here is the translation of Swami Gambhirananda:

“[Teacher:] If you think, ‘I have known Brahman well enough,’ then you have known only the very
little expression that It has in the human body and the little expression that It has among the gods.
Therefore Brahman is still to be deliberated on by you.

“Student:] ‘I think [Brahman] is known. I do not think, “I know [Brahman] well enough;” [i.e. I
consider] “Not that I do not know: I know and I do not know as well.” He among us who understands
that utterance, “Not that I do not know. I Know and I do not know as well,” knows that [Brahman].’”

That may have only compounded the bewilderment, but we can untangle it with patience. These verses
are excellent examples of the difficulty we have when we try to speak the Unspeakable and explain the
Unexplainable.

**An easy mistake**

Brahman is not only everywhere, but actually is all things. (This, too, we cannot exactly comprehend,
and to express it simplistically is to make things much worse.) Because of this, it is easy for those who
have experienced only a hint of Brahman–even a hint of Which is tremendous–to say: “Now I know
Brahman.” But that would be like someone who has seen a cup of seawater saying: “Now I have seen
the Sea.” If we do not know Brahman fully, we cannot truly say that we know Brahman at all. Yet,
there is a knowing that is beyond the intellect and is both knowing and unknowing in an experiential
sense. This is why a medieval mystical English text on the knowledge of God is called _The Cloud of
Unknowing_. When we know Brahman we know that It cannot known in the human sense of knowing.
The same concept is held in Eastern Christianity, where it is said that God cannot be seen, but you must
see God to realize that He cannot be seen.

Is all this said to confuse and mystify us? No; but it does have the purpose of our giving up the
hopeless attempt to comprehend Brahman intellectually.


So the teacher says that to think we know Brahman when we have just glimpsed a hint of Its existence
is a mistake. The clever student, however, points out that we can dimly know something of Brahman.
He then points out that when come to truly know Brahman we will understand that we both know and
do not know Brahman, that it is foolish to say either, “I know Brahman,” or “I do not know Brahman.”
In wisdom, the two go together.

If you still do not get the idea, do not worry. The upanishadic author assumed we might not, so he gives
us this verse to clear things up:

“He truly knows Brahman who knows him as beyond knowledge; he who thinks that he knows, knows
not. The ignorant think that Brahman is known, but the wise know him to be beyond knowledge.”

**Practical experience**

The knowledge of Brahman is not an intellectual matter, and neither is it incapacitating, despite the
common misconception that mystical vision renders us unfit for practical life. So the next verse tells us:

“He who realizes the existence of Brahman behind every activity of his being whether sensing,
perceiving, or thinking–he alone gains immortality. Through knowledge of Brahman comes power.
Through knowledge of Brahman comes victory over death.”

To live in unbroken consciousness of God is liberation. Liberation is possible even here in this world,
while living in the body. For the upanishad continues:

“Blessed is the man who while he yet lives realizes Brahman. The man who realizes him not suffers his
greatest loss. When they depart this life, the wise, who have realized Brahman as the Self in all beings,
become immortal.”

# The Blessed

“Blessed is the man who while he yet lives realizes Brahman. The man who realizes him not suffers his
greatest loss. When they depart this life, the wise, who have realized Brahman as the Self in all beings,
become immortal.”

Swami Nikhilananda renders this verse: “If a man knows Atman here, he then attains the true goal of
life. If he does not know It here, a great destruction awaits him. Having realized the Self in every being,
the wise relinquish the world and become immortal.”

Here and now

It is affirmed over and over in the upanishads and the Bhagavad Gita that perfect realization and
liberation is possible even here in the world. This is one of the glories of Sanatana Dharma. It does not
hold out some vague “bye and bye” hope to be realized only after death–a sure trait of fraudulent
religion. The truth of the Eternal Religion–including Yoga–can be proven at every moment of our life,
just as advances in science, especially in physics and astronomy, reveal the truths intuited by the sages
of India thousands of years ago.

We need to hold firmly to the fact that we can overcome ignorance and bondage in this very lifetime,
that we need not think it will take many incarnations to come to enlightenment. The Bhagavad Gita,
particularly, emphasizes the immediacy of our spiritual potential. “Faith”–another trait of false
religion–is not needed, either. Our practice of yoga and the resulting maturation of consciousness will


enable us to see, experience, and demonstrate the great truths of the upanishads.

What about doubts? They mean nothing, any more than blind beliefs. In some instances, a negative
rejection of truth on the subconscious level masquerades as doubts and can hinder our progress. But
honest doubts cannot. I could cite for you many instances in which I not only doubted something, I
denied its possibility, but still I came to see for myself the truth of what I had not believed. My practice
of yoga kept pushing the frontiers of my insight into areas that I had ignorantly thought were
superstition or silly. And my doubt and denial did not delay even for a moment my coming to
understand the truth I had disbelieved.

This is why no scripture of India is considered to be the “word of God,” the supreme and final
authority. Scriptures, like spiritual teachers, can only point the way, but they cannot definitively state
“the truth.” Yet through interior development there is nothing that can elude the yogi in his quest for
reality. This is why Krishna speaks of Abhyasa Yoga–the Yoga of Practice–as the foundation for those
who wish to really know.

The great loss

Those who do not realize God suffer the greatest loss, for they “lose” themselves _and_ God. What, then,
is left for them? Nothing. Desolate they wander in the desert of their own barren minds and hearts.
Shankara says that the mahati vinashtih, the great destruction, is interminable birth and death in the
material world with all is attendant pains, sorrows, and fears.

The great gain

On the other hand, the wise whose consciousness is steadfastly fixed in God, turn away from the
world–or more exactly, from the bonds and blandishments of the world–and become immortal
(amritam bhavanti) by entering forever into Immortal Brahman.

Blessed are those who live their lives in the perspective of this single verse. Realization and attainment
shall be theirs. For them immortality shall be their assured and eternal future.

# Approaching Brahman

The Kena Upanishad is quite brief, and now concludes with a story and a short reflection on the story.
Here is the story:

**The victory of the gods**

Once the gods won a victory over the demons, and though they had done so only through the power of
Brahman, they were exceedingly vain.

They thought to themselves, “It was we who beat our enemies, and the glory is ours.” Brahman saw
their vanity and appeared before them. But they did not recognize him.

Then the other gods said to the god of fire: “Fire, find out for us who this mysterious spirit is.” “Yes,”
said the god of fire, and approached the spirit.

The spirit said to him: “Who are you?” “I am the god of fire. As a matter of fact, I am very widely
known.”

“And what power do you wield?” “I can burn anything on earth.”


“Burn this,” said the spirit, placing a straw before him. The god of fire fell upon it with all his might,
but could not consume it. So he ran back to the other gods, and said: “I cannot discover who this
mysterious spirit is.”

Then said the other gods to the god of wind: “Wind, do you find out for us who he is.” “Yes,” said the
god of wind, and approached the spirit.

The spirit said to him: “Who are you?” “I am the god of wind. As a matter of fact, I am very widely
known. I fly swiftly through the heavens.”

“And what power do you wield?” “I can blow away anything on earth.”

“Blow this away,” said the spirit, placing a straw before him. The god of wind fell upon it with all his
might, but was unable to move it. So he ran back to the other gods, and said: “I cannot discover who
this mysterious spirit is.”

Then said the other gods to Indra, greatest of them all: “O respected one, find out for us, we pray you,
who he is.” “Yes,” said Indra, and drew nigh to the spirit. But the spirit vanished,

And in his place stood Uma, God the Mother, well adorned and of exceeding beauty. Beholding her,
Indra asked: “Who was the spirit that appeared to us?”

“That,” answered Uma, “was Brahman. Through him it was, not of yourselves, that you attained your
victory and your glory.” Thus did Indra, and the god of fire, and the god of wind, come to recognize
Brahman.

**The Divine Power**

This is a very straightforward account. The “gods” are mostly the intelligent faculties of the individual
human being. The “doctrinal” element is very simple: the senses and mind cannot comprehend
Brahman, but Its truth can be revealed by the Divine Feminine aspect of God, Mahashakti or Adishakti,
the Great, Primal Power that is the dynamic aspect of Brahman, the Prakriti–Divine Creative Energy–
that is inseparable from Purusha–the Supreme Spirit. God the Father is Unmoving Consciousness,
whereas God the Mother is Moving Consciousness. The entire field of creation is Mother, the Father
being the Transcendental Witness of Her manifestations. The Mother is the Divine Ladder which we
ascend to the Bosom of the Father.

Prakriti proceeds from Purusha, the Holy Spirit “proceeds from the Father.”

The fundamental idea of the “dance” of the Creative Energy before the “face” of the Supreme Spirit is
found in the book of Proverbs where she speaks of herself, saying:

“The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his ways, before he made any thing from the beginning. I
was set up from eternity, and of old before the earth was made. The depths were not as yet, and I was
already conceived. neither had the fountains of waters as yet sprung out: The mountains with their huge
bulk had not as yet been established: before the hills I was brought forth: He had not yet made the
earth, nor the rivers, nor the poles of the world. When he prepared the heavens, I was present: when
with a certain law and compass he enclosed the depths: When he established the sky above, and poised
the fountains of waters: When he compassed the sea with its bounds, and set a law to the waters that
they should not pass their limits: when be balanced the foundations of the earth; I was with him
forming all things: and was delighted every day, playing before him at all times; playing in the world.”
The Divine Mother dances the dance of creation before the witnessing Lord.


Although Prabhavananda used the expression “Uma, God the Mother,” the Sanskrit phrase is _Uma
Haimavatim_. Uma in Indian history, was the daughter of King Himalaya, and so was called Himavati.
She was considered a manifestion (avatara) of the Divine Mother aspect of God. Uma is a name often
given the Divine Power. But Shankara has a different, and interesting interpretation of Haimavatim. He
say it means “one who was as though attired in dress of gold.”

This is most intriguing, because in the Bible we have similar imagery of the Divine Mother, the Queen–
sometimes called “the King’s Daughter” because She emanates from the King–being dressed in gold.
David wrote: “Upon thy right hand did stand the queen in gold of Ophir.” And a few verses later: “The
king’s daughter is all glorious within: her clothing is of wrought gold.”

In the book of Revelation we find: “There appeared a great wonder in heaven; a woman clothed with
the sun.” In this instance the “gold” is the light of the sun.

**The elements**

“The god of fire, the god of wind, and Indra—these excelled the other gods, for they approached
nearest to Brahman and were the first to recognize him.”

As said above, in this upanishadic story, the “gods” are mostly the intelligent faculties of the individual
human being. However, Agni, Vayu, and Indra are representative of the primeval Elements fire, air, and
ether. These are “closer” to the Self, to Brahman, than are the earth and water elements, whose faculties
are smell and taste. The faculties of fire, air, and ether respectively are sight, touch, and sound. In
meditation we see light of various colors, experience sensations that are the inner modes of touch, and
in our silent japa of Om hear the inner mental sound. These are three revealers of the presence of the
Self/Brahman. However:

“But of all gods Indra is supreme, for he approached nearest of the three to Brahman and was the first
of the three to recognize him.” The etheric body is the nearest to the Self, and its faculty of sound is
that which unites our consciousness with Brahman. Thus etheric sound is the supreme “god” by which
we “recognize”–perceive–Spirit.

**Brahman in all**

Brahman and Shakti (Power) are in reality one. Sri Ramakrishna often used the simile of fire and its
power to burn. Fire is the Purusha and the burning power is the Prakriti. It is not amiss to say that
Prakriti is the Effect of the presence of Brahman–is Brahman Itself. The upanishad recapitulates this,
saying:

“This is the truth of Brahman in relation to nature: whether in the flash of the lightning, or in the wink
of the eyes, the power that is shown is the power of Brahman. This is the truth of Brahman in relation
to man: in the motions of the mind, the power that is shown is the power of Brahman. For this reason
should a man meditate upon Brahman by day and by night.”

Wherefore: “Brahman is the adorable being in all beings. Meditate upon him as such. He who
meditates upon him as such is honored by all other beings.”

It is the presence of Brahman which draws us to seek after or value an object. As the Brihadaranyaka
Upanishad says:

```
“It is not for the sake of the husband, my beloved, that the husband is dear, but for the sake of
the Self.
```

```
“It is not for the sake of the wife, my beloved, that the wife is dear, but for the sake of the Self.
“It is not for the sake of the children, my beloved, that the children are dear, but for the sake of
the Self.
“It is not for the sake of wealth, my beloved, that wealth is dear, but for the sake of the Self.
“It is not for the sake of the Brahmins, my beloved, that the Brahmins are held in reverence, but
for the sake of the Self.
“It is not for the sake of the Kshatriyas, my beloved, that the Kshatriyas are held in honor, but
for the sake of the Self.
“It is not for the sake of the higher worlds, my beloved, that the higher worlds are desired, but
for the sake of the Self.
“It is not for the sake of the gods, my beloved, that the gods are worshiped, but for the sake of
the Self.
“It is not for the sake of the creatures, my beloved, that the creatures are prized, but for the sake
of the Self.
“It is not for the sake of itself, my beloved, that anything whatever is esteemed, but for the sake
of the Self.”
```
The proof of this is the fact that when we successfully meditate on Brahman other sentient beings will
sense the presence of Brahman in us and value us accordingly.

**It is now up to us**

The teaching is wonderful, but it is not enough. The student of the upanishadic sage intuits this, but
comes to a wrong conclusion, asking: “Sir, teach me more of the knowledge of Brahman.” But the
teacher responds: “I have told you the secret knowledge.” Naturally, the student will assume–as would
we–that the “secret knowledge” is the philosophy about Brahman, etc. Therefore the teacher continues:

“Austerity, self-control, performance of duty without attachment–these are the body of that knowledge.
The Vedas are its limbs. Truth is its very soul.”

The importance of this perspective simply cannot be exaggerated. The Secret Knowledge is not
philosophic formulations: _It is practice_ –what Krishna calls Abhyasa Yoga, the Yoga of Practice. The
Vedas are only its adjuncts. Truth is at its heart to be realized by the practitioners. Tapasya, self-
mastery, and karma yoga form the body of the secret knowledge. There are no effects without a cause.
These three “cause” the knowing of Brahman. about which the sage concludes:

“He who attains to knowledge of Brahman, being freed from all evil, finds the Eternal, the Supreme.”

End of Kena Commentary:
