## What Is a Person?
## 人是什么？

On December 26, 2004, the French writer Emmanuel Carrère; his girlfriend, Hélène; and their respective sons were vacationing at a cliﬀ-top hotel in Sri Lanka. The trip, frankly, was proving to be a bit of a dud. Carrère had thought that Hélène might be the love of his life, the one he’d grow old with. But it occurred to him that he was impressed by her but had never really loved her. It was clear that they were growing apart. Just the night before, on Christmas, they had talked seriously about separating.“We were simply watching ourselves draw apart, without hostility, but with regret,” Carrère wrote. “It was too bad. For the umpteenth time I spoke of my inability to love, all the more remarkable in that Hélène is truly worthy of love.”<br/>
2004年12月26日，法国作家埃马纽埃尔·卡雷尔、他的女友海伦，以及他们各自的儿子在斯里兰卡一座悬崖顶上的酒店度假。坦率地说，这次旅行有些令人失望。卡雷尔曾以为海伦可能是他一生的挚爱，是他将要共度余生的人。但他突然意识到，他对她印象深刻，却从未真正爱过她。显然，他们在渐行渐远。就在前一晚，圣诞节，他们认真地讨论了分手的事。“我们只是看着自己渐行渐远，没有敌意，但充满遗憾，”卡雷尔写道。“这太糟糕了。我已经无数次说过我没有爱的能力，更了不起的是，海伦确实值得被爱。”

As he awoke the next morning, Carrère found himself in a pessimistic, disillusioned state of mind. It was his fault the relationship was ending. He was self-absorbed, unable to open his heart. He reviewed his history of failed relationships and realized, with a pang of self-pity, that he was destined to become a lonely old man. A passage in the novel he was reading hit home: “I would have liked, this morning, a stranger’s hand to close my eyes; I was alone, so I closed them myself.”<br/>
第二天早晨醒来时，卡雷尔发现自己处于一种悲观失望的心态。关系的结束是他的错。他自我专注，无法敞开心扉。他回顾了自己失败的关系史，带着一丝自怜意识到自己注定会成为一个孤独的老人。他正在读的小说中的一段话深深打动了他：“今天早上，我希望有一个陌生人的手来闭上我的眼睛；然而我独自一人，只能自己闭上它们。”

Unsurprisingly, a kind of pall settled over Carrère, Hélène, and their boys. Sri Lanka’s beauty failed to enchant. Three days into the trip, they were ready to go home. Feeling listless, they decided to cancel the scuba- diving lesson they’d scheduled for that morning.<br/>
不出所料，一种阴郁的气氛笼罩在卡雷尔、海伦和他们的儿子们之间。斯里兰卡的美景未能打动他们。旅行的第三天，他们已经准备回家了。感到无精打采，他们决定取消原定于当日上午的潜水课程。

It turned out to be a consequential decision, for that was the morning the tsunami hit.<br/>
事实证明，这个决定意义重大，因为那天早上海啸袭击了。

Two days earlier, Carrère had met another French family at the hotel restaurant—Jérôme, Delphine, and their lovely four-year-old daughter, Juliette. The morning of the tsunami, Jérôme and Delphine had gone into town to get supplies, leaving Juliette playing on the beach with her grandfather. Juliette was splashing in the surf while her grandfather read the paper in a beach chair. Suddenly, the old man felt himself swept up in a wall of swirling black water, pretty sure that he would die, and certain that his granddaughter already had.<br/>
两天前，卡雷尔在酒店餐厅遇到了另一家法国家庭——杰罗姆、德尔菲娜和他们可爱的四岁女儿朱丽叶。海啸来临的早上，杰罗姆和德尔菲娜进城采购物资，留下朱丽叶和她的祖父在海滩上玩耍。朱丽叶在海浪中嬉戏，而她的祖父则坐在沙滩椅上看报纸。突然，老人感到自己被一堵旋转的黑色水墙卷了起来，几乎肯定自己会死，而且确信他的孙女已经遇难。

The wave carried him inland. He passed over houses, trees, a road. Then the wave reversed itself and the vast force of the receding water threatened to sweep him out into open ocean. He grabbed onto a palm tree and held on. A section of fence, carried in the water, pinned him to the trunk. Furniture, people, animals, wooden beams, and chunks of concrete rushed by.<br/>
海浪把他卷到了内陆。他越过了房屋、树木和一条道路。然后，海浪倒退，退去的水的巨大力量威胁要把他带到开阔的海洋中去。他抓住一棵棕榈树紧紧抱住。一段在水中漂浮的栅栏把他压在树干上。家具、人、动物、木梁和混凝土块从他身边飞驰而过。

When the water receded, he opened his eyes and realized that he was alive—and that the real nightmare had just begun. He slid down the tree trunk and stood in what was now shallow water. A woman’s body ﬂoated past. He understood his mission was to get to town and ﬁnd Juliette’s parents. When he spotted them at last, he was struck by the realization that they were experiencing their last moments of pure happiness. He told them that Juliette was dead.<br/>

“Delphine screamed; Jérôme didn’t,” Carrère writes in his memoir. “He took Delphine in his arms and hugged her as tightly as he could while she screamed and screamed, and from then on he had only one objective: I can no longer do anything for my daughter, so I will save my wife.” <br/>

The task now was to cope with the devastation: to ﬁnd Juliette’s body and bring her home for burial. Carrère and his group had dinner with Delphine and Jérôme that night, the night of Juliette’s death, then breakfast the next day, then lunch and then dinner again, and over and over. The two families clung to one another for the next several days, eating together, searching the hospitals for Juliette, comforting the other victims of the tsunami. Carrère watched Delphine absorb the blow over these meals. She was no longer crying or screaming. She stared into space. She ate very little. Her hand shook as she brought a forkful of rice to her mouth. Her entire model of the world had been organized around her relationship with her daughter. That model had just been blown apart. Jérôme watched her constantly, willing her to keep herself together.<br/>

Hélène, Carrère’s girlfriend, leapt into action, was everywhere at once, oﬀering practical and emotional help to the broken and devastated survivors who had dragged themselves back to the hotel. Hélène was a woman with a mission. She called the insurance companies and airlines, made travel arrangements, and sat with the mourners. She felt that she and Carrère were united by the same mission: to help the survivors. He, though, was having a diﬀerent experience. He was still walled in on himself, and saw himself as useless. “I see myself rather as the insipid husband,” he writes. In bed that ﬁrst night, the night of the tsunami, he reached out for Hélène’s ﬁngertips in bed butdidn’t quite make contact. “It’s as if I no longer exist,” he thinks at one point.<br/>

Later Carrère went to the nearby hospital to help search for Juliette’s body, dragging himself through rooms reeking with the stench of the corpses laid out in rows, bloated and gray. He and Delphine met a twenty-ﬁve-year-old Scottish woman, Ruth, who was on her honeymoon, and had been standing ten feet from her husband near the beach when the wave lifted them up and separated them. She waited day after day at the hospital, convinced that if she fell asleep she would miss him, and he would never come back to her alive. She hadn’t eaten or slept in days. “Her determination is frightening,” Carrère writes. “You can sense that she’s quite close to passing to the other side, into catatonia, living death, and Delphine and I understand that our role is to prevent this.” <br/>

There were practical details to look after, but there was also a lot of waiting, times when they were just sitting with each other and talking. Instinctively, they told each other their life stories. Delphine told Carrère about her family’s life back in France, about how Jérôme would come home from work every day to have lunch with his wife and daughter, about Juliette’s love for animals and the way she insisted on feeding the rabbits. Delphine described it as if that life was now centuries in the past.<br/>

Jérôme was still on his mission to save his wife. At meals, he tried to bear everyone up, telling stories, talking loudly, smoking, pouring drinks, refusing to let silence envelop them. At the same time, Carrère watched Jérôme watching Delphine: “Out of the corner of his eye, he kept watch over Delphine, and I remember thinking, there it is, real love, a man who truly loves his wife. There’s nothingmore beautiful. But Delphine remained silent, absent, horribly calm.” <br/>

They were all circling around Delphine, implicitly begging: Don’t leave. Stay with us. During dinner at a restaurant one night, Delphine watched a little boy slide into his mother’s lap, stared as she petted him. Carrère put himself in Delphine’s mind as this happened and imagined what she must have been seeing and thinking: how she will never again sit on her daughter’s bed and read her to sleep with a story. Delphine watched the boy and his mother go oﬀ to their room. She met Carrère’s eyes and with a slight smile murmured, “He’s so little.” <br/>


Ruth was ﬁnally able to use Hélène’s phone to call her parents in Scotland, to tell them that she was alive. Carrère and Hélène were looking on as she talked on the phone. She began crying. Her tears became convulsive sobs. Her parents had just told her that her husband was in fact alive, and her tears morphed into laughter. Delphine, weeping, rushed up and enfolded Ruth in her arms.<br/>

The members of this small community, Carrère writes, were by then intimately connected and radically separated: connected by grief and separated by the blow that had hit one couple and spared the others. Carrère was certainly not self-absorbed now. He looked at the others across the dinner table. “I know that we loved them and I believe they loved us,” he remembers later. He had entered the minds of each of the people around him, feeling their feelings, seeing a bit through their eyes, understanding the things they did to survive. His searing memoir is called Lives Other Than My Own, for that is the thing he has learned to see in this crisis: other people, other perspectives.<br/>

As they embarked on their long trip back to France, Carrère began to view Hélène diﬀerently. Before he hadseen her as a bit glum. Now he envisioned her “as the heroine of a novel or an adventure ﬁlm, the brave and beautiful journalist who in the heat of the action holds nothing back.” They were taken in a van to a school where they could shower and gather their things. Carrère reﬂected on how fragile their bodies were. “I looked at Hélène’s, so lovely, so weighed down with horror and fatigue. I felt not desire but a searing pity, a need to care, to cherish, to protect forever. I thought, She might have died. She is precious to me. So precious. I’d like her to be old someday. I’d like her ﬂesh to be old and ﬂabby, and I’d like still to love her….A dam opened, releasing a ﬂood of sorrow, relief, love, all mixed together. I hugged Hélène and told her, I don’t want to break up anymore, not ever. She said, I don’t want to break up anymore either.” Carrère had made a resolution: He must spend his life with her. “I tell myself that this long life together must happen,” he writes. “If I need to succeed at one thing before I die, it’s this.” What Carrère remembers about the next days is his fear that Hélène will leave him. What Hélène remembers is that those were the days when they truly came together. They ended up marrying and having a little girl of their own.<br/>

I tell you this story to make two points. The ﬁrst is that it shows, in a concrete way, how diﬀerent people can experience the same event in profoundly diﬀerent ways. Each of the people in the Carrère vignette has been hit by a terrible blow, but each one feels it diﬀerently, depending on how the event has aﬀected them, depending on their life history, and depending on the task the situation has thrown before them.<br/>

For Jérôme, it’s straightforward: The tsunami launches him on a desperate mission to save his wife. He doesn’t have to deliberate about that. The moment he hears of hisdaughter’s death, he knows that his only job is to save Delphine. For Delphine, the task is simply to withstand the blow. For Hélène, the tsunami means coming into herself— being the person who serves others in a crisis. For Ruth, the task is to stand guard and will her husband back to life.
At ﬁrst Carrère experiences the tsunami through the prism of his own haplessness. He is the self-enclosed loner who hasn’t risen to the occasion.<br/>

Events happen in our lives, but each person processes and experiences any given event in their own unique way. Aldous Huxley captured the core reality: “Experience is not what happens to you, it’s what you do with what happens to you.”<br/>


***

In other words, there are two layers of reality. There is the objective reality of what happens, and there is the subjective reality of how what happened is seen, interpreted, made meaningful. That second subjective layer can sometimes be the more important layer. As the Yale psychologist Marc Brackett puts it, “Well-being depends less on objective events than on how those events are perceived, dealt with, and shared with others.” This subjective layer is what we want to focus on in our quest to know other people. The crucial question is not “What happened to this person?” or “What are the items on their résumé?” Instead, we should ask: “How does this person interpret what happened? How does this person see things? How do they construct their reality?” This is what we really want to know if we want to understand another person.<br/>

An extrovert walks into a party and sees a diﬀerent room than an introvert does. A person who has beentrained as an interior designer sees a diﬀerent room than someone who’s been trained as a security specialist. The therapist Irvin Yalom once asked one of his patients to write a summary of each group therapy session they did together. When he read her reports, Yalom realized that she experienced each session radically diﬀerently than he did. She never even heard the supposedly brilliant insights Yalom thought he was sharing with the group. Instead, she noticed the small personal acts—the way one person complimented another’s clothing, the way someone apologized for being late. In other words, we may be at the same event together, but we’re each having our own experience of it. Or, as the writer Anaïs Nin put it, “We do not see things as they are, we see things as we are.” <br/>

The second reason I’ve told you this story is that it shows how a person’s whole perspective, his or her way of seeing and interpreting and experiencing the world, can be transformed. In normal times our subjective consciousness changes gradually, but in the wake of shocking events it can change all at once.<br/>

At the start of the story Carrère believes himself to be a morose, self-absorbed, hapless man. He regards Hélène as an impressive woman he does not love. But the tsunami breaks him open and revolutionizes how he sees himself, how he sees Hélène, and how he experiences the world. A self-absorbed perspective is replaced with a more other- absorbed perspective. He sees himself as a man with a new task: to commit to this love that has welled up inside him, to ensure that he and Hélène spend the rest of their lives together. It isn’t so much that he makes a rational decision to change how he sees Hélène and himself. Something erupts from deep within him, a transformation of his whole point of view.<br/>

Delphine’s transformation is even more dramatic. As any parent can tell you, when a child is born you ﬁnd that your perspective on life gets transformed. It is transformed again if a child is ripped from your life. Delphine had gotten used to living in a certain way—hugging Juliette, feeding Juliette, playing with Juliette. She had models in her head built around those common experiences. Now Juliette is gone, and the models in her mind don’t accord with her new reality. Her life story will now be organized around Before and After. Before the tsunami, she had one perspective on life. After it, she will have to develop another perspective. She will have to go through a process of grief, with its moments of shocking pain, moments when old memories intrude into her mind. She will probably suﬀer from recurring bouts of agony and anguish as she contemplates the terror that must have descended on Juliette in her ﬁnal seconds. But slowly, slowly, the models in her mind will re-form. Her point of view will adjust to her new external reality. Delphine will construct a perspective that incorporates Juliette as a presence in her memories and in her heart, forever part of how the post-tsunami Delphine sees the world. This process of grief and mental re-formation is also not something that can be consciously controlled. It ﬂows along its own surprising and idiosyncratic course—again from somewhere deep within. Each mind is relentlessly remaking itself.<br/>


***

If you want to see and understand people well, you have to know what you are looking at. You have to know what a person is. And this traumatic vignette highlights a central truth about what human beings are: A person is a point ofview. Every person you meet is a creative artist who takes the events of life and, over time, creates a very personal way of seeing the world. Like any artist, each person takes the experiences of a lifetime and integrates them into a complex representation of the world. That representation, the subjective consciousness that makes you you, integrates your memories, attitudes, beliefs, convictions, traumas, loves, fears, desires, and goals into your own distinct way of seeing. That representation helps you interpret all the ambiguous data your senses pick up, helps you predict what’s going to happen, helps you discern what really matters in a situation, helps you decide how to feel about any situation, helps shape what you want, who you love, what you admire, who you are, and what you should be doing at any given moment. Your mind creates a world, with beauty and ugliness, excitement, tedium, friends, and enemies, and you live within that construction. People don’t see the world with their eyes; they see it with their entire life.<br/>

Cognitive scientists call this view of the human person “constructionism.” Constructionism is the recognition, backed up by the last half century of brain research, that people don’t passively take in reality. Each person actively constructs their own perception of reality. That’s not to say there is not an objective reality out there. It’s to say that we have only subjective access to it. “The mind is its own place,” the poet John Milton wrote, “and in itself / Can make a Heaven of Hell, a Hell of Heaven.”<br/>

As we try to understand other people, we want to be constantly asking ourselves: How are they perceiving this situation? How are they experiencing this moment? How are they constructing their reality?<br/>

Let me dip brieﬂy into brain science to try to show you how radical this process of construction is. Let’s take an example as simple as the act of looking around a room. It doesn’t feel like you’re creating anything. It feels like you’re taking in what’s objectively out there. You open your eyes. Light waves ﬂood in. Your brain records what you see: a chair, a painting, a dust bunny on the ﬂoor. It feels like one of those old-fashioned cameras—the shutter opens and light ﬂoods in and gets recorded on the ﬁlm.<br/>

But this is not how perception really works. Your brain is locked in the dark, bony vault of your skull. Its job is to try to make sense of the world given the very limited amount of information that makes it into your retinas, through the optic nerves, and onto the integrative layer of the visual cortex. Your senses give you a poor-quality, low-resolution snapshot of the world, and your brain is then forced to take that and construct a high-deﬁnition, feature-length movie.<br/>

To do that, your visual system constructs the world by taking what you already know and applying it to the scene in front of you. Your mind is continually asking itself questions like “What is this similar to?” and “Last time I was in this situation, what did I see next?” Your mind projects out a series of models of what it expects to see. Then the eyes check in to report back about whether they are seeing what the mind expected. In other words, seeing is not a passive process of receiving data; it’s an active process of prediction and correction.<br/>

Perception, the neuroscientist Anil Seth writes, is “a generative, creative act.” It is “an action-oriented construction, rather than a passive registration of an objective external reality.” Or as the neuroscientist Lisa Feldman Barrett notes, “Scientiﬁc evidence shows that what we see, hear, touch, taste, and smell are largelysimulations of the world, not reactions to it.” Most of us non-neuroscientists are not aware of all this constructive activity, because it happens unconsciously. It’s as if the brain is composing vast, complex Proustian novels, and to the conscious mind it feels like no work at all.<br/>

Social psychologists take a wicked delight in exposing the ﬂaws of this prediction-correction way of seeing. They do this by introducing things into a scene that we don’t predict will be there and therefore don’t see. You probably know about the invisible gorilla experiment. Researchers present subjects with a video of a group of people moving around passing a basketball and ask the subjects to count the number of passes by the team wearing white. After the video, the researchers ask, “Did you see the gorilla?” Roughly half the research subjects have no idea what the researchers are talking about. But when they view the video a second time, with the concept “gorilla” now in their heads, they are stunned to see that a man in a gorilla suit had strolled right into the circle, stood there for a few seconds, and then walked out. They didn’t see it before because they didn’t predict “gorilla.” <br/>

In my favorite experiment of this sort, a researcher asks a student for directions to a particular place on a college campus. The student starts giving directions. Then a couple of “workmen”—actually, two other researchers—rudely carry a door between the directions asker and the directions giver. As the door passes between them, the directions asker surreptitiously trades places with one of the workmen. After the door has passed, the directions giver ﬁnds himself giving directions to an entirely diﬀerent human being. And the majority of these directions givers don’t notice. They just keep on giving directions. We don’texpect one human being to magically turn into another, and therefore we don’t see it when it happens.<br/>

In 1951 there was a particularly brutal football game between Dartmouth and Princeton. Afterward, fans of both teams were furious because, they felt, the opposing team had been so vicious. When psychologists had students rewatch a ﬁlm of the game in a calmer setting, the students still fervently believed that the other side had committed twice as many penalties as their own side. When challenged about their biases, both sides pointed to the game ﬁlm as objective proof that their side was right. As the psychologists researching this phenomenon, Albert Hastorf and Hadley Cantril, put it, “The data here indicate that there is no such ‘thing’ as a ‘game’ existing ‘out there’ in its own right which people merely ‘observe.’ The ‘game’ ‘exists’ for a person and is experienced by him only insofar as certain things have signiﬁcances in terms of his purpose.” The students from the diﬀerent schools constructed two diﬀerent games depending on what they wanted to see. Or as the psychiatrist Iain McGilchrist puts it, “The model we choose to use to understand something determines what we ﬁnd.”<br/>

Researchers like exposing the ﬂaws in our way of seeing, but I’m constantly amazed at how brilliant the human mind is at constructing a rich, beautiful world. For example, in normal conversation, people often slur and mispronounce words. If you heard each word someone said in isolation, you wouldn’t be able to understand 50 percent of them. But because your mind is so good at predicting what words probably should be in what sentence, you can easily create a coherent ﬂow of meaning from other people’s talk.<br/>

The universe is a drab, silent, colorless place. I mean this quite literally. There is no such thing as color and sound in the universe; it’s just a bunch of waves and particles. But because we have creative minds, we perceive sound and music, tastes and smells, color and beauty, awe and wonder. All that stuﬀ is in here in your mind, not out there in the universe.<br/>


***

I’ve taken this dip into neuroscience to give the briefest sense of just how much creative artistry every person is performing every second of the day. And if your mind has to do a lot of constructive work in order for you to see the physical objects in front of you, imagine how much work it has to undertake to construct your identity, your life story, your belief system, your ideals. There are roughly eight billion people on Earth, and each one of them sees the world in their own unique, never-to-be-repeated way.<br/>

If I want to see you, I want to see, at least a little bit, how you see the world. I want to see how you construct your reality, how you make meaning. I want to step, at least a bit, out of my point of view and into your point of view.<br/>

How do you do that? Constructionism suggests a way forward, a method to engage with others. In this approach, the last thing I want to do is pin you down and inspect you, as if you were some lab sample. I will not reduce you to a type or restrict you to a label, like many of those human- typology systems do—Myers-Briggs, the Enneagram, the zodiac, and so on.<br/>

Instead, I want to receive you as an active creator. I want to understand how you construct your point of view. I want to ask you how you see things. I want you to teach meabout the enduring energies of old events that shape how you see the world today.<br/>

I’m going to engage with you. Looking at a person is diﬀerent from looking at a thing because a person is looking back at you. I’m going to get to know you at the same time you’re going to get to know me. Quality conversation is the essence of this approach.<br/>

If we’re going to become Illuminators, we need to ﬁrst ask questions and engage with answers. We need to ask: How does this look to you? Do you see the same situation I see? Then we need to ask: What are the experiences and beliefs that cause you to see it that way? For example, I might ask, What happened to you in childhood that makes you still see the world from the vantage point of an outsider? What was it about your home life that makes celebrating holidays and hosting dinner parties so important to you? You hate asking for favors. Why is that such an issue for you? You seem to have it all, and yet you are insecure. Why is that? <br/>

As we have these conversations, we’re becoming more aware of the models we use to construct reality. We’re getting to know each other better. We’re also getting to know ourselves better.<br/>

***

Before the tsunami, Emmanuel Carrère saw himself as an isolated, loveless man. He viewed life through the prism of his ambition: “I who live in dissatisfaction, constant tension, running after dreams of glory and laying waste to my loves because I always imagine that one day, somewhere else, I’ll ﬁnd something better.” He was imprisoned by a set of models that made him feelperpetually unsatisﬁed with his own life, perpetually unable to see the beauty of the people right around him.<br/>

The trauma of the tsunami rearranged his models. He was pushed into intimate contact with others’ minds as they suﬀered great loss and endured great pain. He sat with these people, talked with them, entered into their experiences. He got to know others in powerful new ways and became something of an Illuminator.<br/>

When he entered into lives other than his own, his perspectives widened and deepened. He saw others diﬀerently, himself diﬀerently. He was humanized. He felt with more aﬀection and saw the world with more wisdom. This is the eﬀect that seeing others deeply tends to have on people. As the Harvard psychologist Robert Kegan has observed, what the eye sees more deeply the heart tends to love more tenderly.<br/>

The greatest thing a person does is to take the lessons of life, the hard knocks of life, the surprises of life, and the mundane realities of life and reﬁne their own consciousness so that they can gradually come to see the world with more understanding, more wisdom, more humanity, and more grace. George Bernard Shaw got it right: “Life isn’t about ﬁnding yourself. Life is about creating yourself.”<br/>

