## Illumination 
## 启迪

A few years ago, I was in Waco, Texas. I was there to ﬁnd and interview Weavers, the kind of community builders who knit towns and neighborhoods together, who drive civic life. It’s not hard to ﬁnd such people. You simply go to a place and ask residents, “Who is trusted around here? Who makes this place run?” People will start oﬀering you the names of the people they admire, the people who hold up and work for the community.<br/>
几年前，我在德克萨斯州的瓦科。我去那里是为了寻找和采访织网者，那些将城镇和邻里编织在一起的社区建设者，那些推动公民生活的驱动力。要找到这样的人并不难。你只需去一个地方，询问居民：“这里有谁是受到信任的？谁让这个地方运转起来？”人们会开始向你提供他们所钦佩的人的名字，那些支撑和为社区工作的人。

In Waco, a number of people told me about a ninety- three-year-old Black woman named LaRue Dorsey. I reached out, and we arranged to get together over breakfast at a diner. She’d spent her career mostly as a teacher, and I asked her about her life and the communities she was part of in Waco.<br/>
在瓦科，许多人告诉我关于一位九十三岁的黑人女性，名叫拉鲁·多尔西的故事。我联系上了她，我们约好在一家餐馆吃早餐见面。她的职业生涯大部分时间都是作为一名教师度过的，我询问了她关于她的生活以及她在瓦科所参与的社区。

Every journalist has their own interviewing style. Some reporters are seducers. They lure you into giving them information by showering you with warmth and approval. Some are transactionalists. Their interviews are implicit bargains: If you give me information about this, I’ll give you information about that. Others are simply delightful, magnetic personalities. (I have a theory that my friend Michael Lewis has been able to write so many great books because he’s just so damn likable that people will divulge anything simply to keep him hanging around.) My mode, I suppose, is that of a student. I’m earnest and deferential, not overly familiar. I ask people to teach me things. I generally don’t get too personal.<br/>
每位记者都有自己的采访风格。有些记者是诱惑者。他们通过向你倾洒温暖和认可来诱使你提供信息。有些是交易主义者。他们的采访是隐性的交易：如果你提供关于这个的信息，我就给你关于那个的信息。还有些人就是令人愉悦、具有吸引力的人格。（我有一个理论，认为我的朋友迈克尔·刘易斯能够写出这么多伟大的书，是因为他就是他妈的如此讨人喜欢，人们愿意透露任何事情，仅仅是为了让他继续留在周围。）我认为我的方式是学生模式。我是认真的、恭敬的，不过分亲昵。我请人们教我东西。我通常不会过分涉及个人隐私。

That morning over breakfast, Mrs. Dorsey presented herself to me as a stern drill sergeant type, a woman, she wanted me to know, who was tough, who had standards, who laid down the law. “I loved my students enough to discipline them,” she told me. I was a bit intimidated by her.<br/>
那个早晨，在早餐时分，多尔西夫人展现给我的是一种严厉的训练军官形象，她想让我知道，她是一位坚强的女性，有自己的标准，会制定规则。“我爱我的学生，所以我会管教他们，”她告诉我。我有一些被她震慑到了。

In the middle of the meal, a mutual friend named Jimmy Dorrell entered the diner. Jimmy is a teddy-bearish white man in his sixties who built a church for homeless people under a highway overpass, who leads a homeless shelter by his house, who serves the poor. He and Mrs. Dorsey had worked together on various community projects over the years.<br/>
在用餐过程中，一位名叫吉米·多雷尔的共同朋友走进了餐馆。吉米是一位六十多岁的白人男性，长得像泰迪熊，他为无家可归的人在高速公路立交桥下建了一座教堂，他在自己家附近管理一个无家可归者收容所，服务于贫困人群。多年来，他和多尔西夫人在各种社区项目上合作。

He saw her across the room and came up to our table smiling as broadly as it is possible for a human face to smile. Then he grabbed her by the shoulders and shook her way harder than you should ever shake a ninety-three-year- old. He leaned in, inches from her face, and cried out in a voice that ﬁlled the whole place: “Mrs. Dorsey! Mrs.Dorsey! You’re the best! You’re the best! I love you! I love you!” 
他在房间的另一边看见了她，带着可能是人脸上能展现的最灿烂的笑容，向我们的桌子走来。接着，他抓住她的肩膀，以一种绝不应该对一位九十三岁老人使用的力度猛烈摇晃。他凑近她的脸，大声喊道，声音充满了整个地方：“多尔西夫人！多尔西夫人！你是最棒的！你是最棒的！我爱你！我爱你！

I’ve never seen a person’s whole aspect transformed so suddenly. The old, stern disciplinarian face she’d put on under my gaze vanished, and a joyous, delighted nine-year- old girl appeared. By projecting a diﬀerent quality of attention, Jimmy called forth a diﬀerent version of her. Jimmy is an Illuminator.<br/>
我从未见过一个人的整个面貌如此突然地转变。在我的注视下，她那年老、严厉的、自律的面孔消失了，取而代之的是一个充满喜悦和欢愉的九岁小女孩的面容。通过投射一种不同品质的关注，吉米激发出了一个不同版本的她。吉米是一个启迪者。


At that moment, I began to fully appreciate the power of attention. Each of us has a characteristic way of showing up in the world, a physical and mental presence that sets a tone for how people interact with us. Some people walk into a room with an expression that is warm and embracing; others walk in looking cool and closed up. Some people ﬁrst encounter others with a gaze that is generous and loving; other people regard those they meet with a formal and aloof gaze.<br/>
就在那一刻，我开始全面（深刻）体会到关注的能力。我们每个人在世界上都有呈现自己的特有方式，一种物质和精神的存在，为我们与它人之间的互动定下基调。有些人走进一个房间，散发着温暖且包容；而另一些人则显得冷漠且封闭。有些人与他人初次相遇时，目光慷慨且充满爱意；其他人则以一种正式和冷淡的目光对待所遇之人。

That gaze, that ﬁrst sight, represents a posture toward the world. A person who is looking for beauty is likely to ﬁnd wonders, while a person looking for threats will ﬁnd danger. A person who beams warmth brings out the glowing sides of the people she meets, while a person who conveys formality can meet the same people and ﬁnd them stiﬀ and detached. “Attention,” the psychiatrist Iain McGilchrist writes, “is a moral act: it creates, brings aspects of things into being.” The quality of your life depends quite a bit on the quality of attention you project out onto the world.<br/>
那一抹目光，那一瞥的初见，映射出对世界的一种姿态。一个寻找美好的人很可能会发现奇迹，而寻找刺激的人则会找到危险。散发温暖的人能引出她遇见的人们神采奕奕的一面，而一个拘谨的人遇到同样的人却会发现他们僵硬而冷漠。“注意力”，精神病学家艾恩·麦吉尔克里斯特写道，“是一种道德行为：它创造，将事物的某些方面（从无，未显化的状态）带入到存有（的状态）。”你生命的品质在很大程度上取决于你投射到世界上的注意力的品质。

The moral of my Waco story, then, is that you should attend to people more like Jimmy and less like me.<br/>
那么，我在瓦科故事的寓意是，你应该更像吉米那样关注人，而不是像我这样。

Now, you may think this is an unfair comparison. Jimmy had known Mrs. Dorsey for years. Of course he was going to be more familiar with her than I was going to be. Jimmy has a big, boisterous personality. If I tried to greet people the way Jimmy does, it would feel fake. It’s just not me.<br/>
现在，你可能会认为这是一个不公平的比较。吉米与多尔西夫人相识多年。他当然会比我更熟悉她。吉米有一个大大咧咧，热情爽朗的性格。如果我试图像吉米那样去迎接人，那会感觉很假。这个风格的确不是我。

But the point I’m trying to make is more profound than that. Jimmy’s gaze when he greets a person derives from a certain conception of what a person is. Jimmy is a pastor. When Jimmy sees a person—any person—he is seeing a creature who was made in the image of God. As he looks into each face, he is looking, at least a bit, into the face of God. When Jimmy sees a person, any person, he is also seeing a creature endowed with an immortal soul—a soul ofinﬁnite value and dignity. When Jimmy greets a person, he is also trying to live up to one of the great callings of his faith: He is trying to see that person the way Jesus would see that person. He is trying to see them with Jesus’s eyes —eyes that lavish love on the meek and the lowly, the marginalized and those in pain, and on every living person. When Jimmy sees a person, he comes in with the belief that this person is so important that Jesus was willing to die for their sake. As a result, Jimmy is going to greet people with respect and reverence. That’s how he’s always greeted me.<br/>

Now, you may be an atheist, an agnostic, a Christian, a Jew, a Muslim, a Buddhist, or something else, but this posture of respect and reverence, this awareness of the inﬁnite dignity of each person you meet, is a precondition for seeing people well. You may ﬁnd the whole idea of God ridiculous, but I ask you to believe in the concept of a soul. You may just be chatting with someone about the weather, but I ask you to assume that the person in front of you contains some piece of themselves that has no weight, size, color, or shape yet gives them inﬁnite value and dignity. If you consider that each person has a soul, you will be aware that each person has some transcendent spark inside them. You will be aware that at the deepest level we are all equals. We’re not equal in might, intelligence, or wealth, but we are all equal on the level of our souls. If you see the people you meet as precious souls, you’ll probably wind up treating them well.<br/>

If you can attend to people in this way, you won’t be merely observing them or scrutinizing them. You’ll be illuminating them with a gaze that is warm, respectful, and admiring. You’ll be oﬀering a gaze that says, “I’m going to trust you, before you trust me.” Being an Illuminator is away of being with other people, a style of presence, an ethical ideal.<br/>

When you’re practicing Illuminationism, you’re oﬀering a gaze that says, “I want to get to know you and be known by you.” It’s a gaze that positively answers the question everybody is unconsciously asking themselves when they meet you: “Am I a person to you? Do you care about me? Am I a priority for you?” The answers to those questions are conveyed in your gaze before they are conveyed by your words. It’s a gaze that radiates respect. It’s a gaze that says that every person I meet is unique, unrepeatable, and, yes, superior to me in some way. Every person I meet is fascinating on some topic. If I approach you in this respectful way, I’ll know that you are not a puzzle that can be solved but a mystery that can never be gotten to the bottom of. I’ll do you the honor of suspending judgment and letting you be as you are. Respect is a gift you oﬀer with your eyes.<br/>

In the previous chapter, I listed some of the qualities that make it hard to see others: egotism, anxiety, objectivism, essentialism, and so on. In this one I’d like to list some of the features of the Illuminator’s gaze: TENDERNESS. If you want to see a stellar example of how to illuminate people, go back and look at how Mister Rogers used to interact with children. Look at how Ted Lasso looks at his players on that TV show. Look at how Rembrandt rendered faces. When you are in the presence of a Rembrandt portrait, you’re seeing the warts and wounds of the subject, but you’re also peering into their depths, seeing their inner dignity, the immeasurable complexity of their inner lives. The novelist Frederick Buechner observedthat not all the faces Rembrandt painted were remarkable.<br/>

Sometimes the subject is just an old man or an elderly lady we wouldn’t look at twice if we passed them on the street.<br/>

But even the plainest faces “are so remarkably seen by Rembrandt that we are jolted into seeing them remarkably.” “Tenderness is deep emotional concern about another being,” the novelist Olga Tokarczuk declared in her Nobel Prize acceptance speech. “Tenderness perceives the bonds that connect us, the similarities and the sameness between us.” Literature, she argued, “is built on tenderness toward any being other than ourselves.” And so is seeing.<br/>

RECEPTIVITY. Being receptive means overcoming insecurities and self-preoccupation and opening yourself up to the experience of another. It means you resist the urge to project your own viewpoint; you do not ask, “How would I feel if I were in your shoes?” Instead, you are patiently ready for what the other person is oﬀering. As the theologian Rowan Williams put it, we want our minds to be slack and attentive at the same time, the senses relaxed, open, and alive, the eyes tenderly poised.<br/>

ACTIVE CURIOSITY. You want to have an explorer’s heart. The novelist Zadie Smith once wrote that when she was a girl, she was constantly imagining what it would be like to grow up in the homes of her friends. “I rarely entered a friend’s home without wondering what it might be like to never leave,” she wrote. “That is, what it would be like to be Polish or Ghanaian or Irish or Bengali, to be richer or poorer, to say these prayers or hold those politics. I was an equal-opportunity voyeur. I wanted to know what it was liketo be everybody. Above all, I wondered what it would be like to believe the sorts of things I didn’t believe.” What a fantastic way to train your imagination in the art of seeing others.<br/>

AFFECTION. We children of the Enlightenment live in a culture that separates reason from emotion. Knowing, for us, is an intellectual exercise. When we want to “know” about something, we study it, we collect data about it, we dissect it.<br/>

But many cultures and traditions never fell for this nonsense about the separation between reason and emotion, and so they never conceived of knowing as a brain-only, disembodied activity. In the biblical world, for example, “knowing” is also a whole-body experience. In the Bible, “knowing” can involve studying, having sex with, showing concern for, entering into a covenant with, being familiar with, understanding the reputation of. God is described as the perfect knower, the seer of all things, the one who sees not only with the objective eye of a scientist but with the grace-ﬁlled eye of perfect love.<br/>

The human characters in the Bible are measured by how well they can imitate this aﬀectionate way of knowing. They often fail during these dramas of recognition. In the parable of the Good Samaritan, an injured Jew lies beaten and left for dead on the side of the road. At least two other Jews, one of them a priest, pass him by, crossing to the other side of the street, not doing anything to help. They see him strictly intellectually. Only the Samaritan, a man from an alien and hated people, truly sees him. Only the Samaritan enters into the injured man’s experience and actually does something to help him. In these biblical cases,where someone sees another without really seeing, these failures of knowledge are not intellectual failures; they are failures of the heart.<br/>

GENEROSITY. Dr. Ludwig Guttmann was a German Jew who escaped Nazi Germany in 1939 and found a job in a hospital in Britain that served paraplegics, mostly men injured in the war. When he ﬁrst started working there, the hospital heavily sedated these men and kept them conﬁned to their beds. Guttmann, however, didn’t see the patients the way the other doctors saw them. He cut back on the sedatives, forced them out of bed, and started throwing balls at them and doing other things to get them active. As a result, he was summoned to a tribunal of his peers, where his methods were challenged.<br/>

“These are moribund cripples,” one doctor asserted.<br/>

“Who do you think they are?” “They are the best of men,” Guttmann replied.<br/>

It was his generosity of spirit that changed how he deﬁned them. He continued organizing games, ﬁrst at the hospital, then for paraplegics around the nation. In 1960 this led to the Paralympic Games.<br/>

A HOLISTIC ATTITUDE. A great way to mis-see people is to see only a piece of them. Some doctors mis-see their patients when they see only their bodies. Some employers mis-see workers when they see only their productivity. We must resist every urge to simplify in this way. The art historian John Richardson, Pablo Picasso’s biographer, was once asked if Picasso was a misogynist and a bad guy. He would not let his subject be oversimpliﬁed or robbed of his contradictions. “That’s a lot of nonsense,” he replied.“Whatever you say about him—you say that he’s a mean bastard—he was also an angelic, compassionate, tender, sweet man. The reverse is always true. You say he was stingy. He was also incredibly generous. You say that he was very bohemian, but also he had a sort of up-tight bourgeois side. I mean, he was a mass of antitheses.” As are we all.<br/>

As the great Russian novelist Leo Tolstoy once wrote: One of the commonest and most generally accepted delusions is that every man can be qualiﬁed in some particular way—said to be kind, wicked, stupid, energetic, apathetic and so on. People are not like that. We may say of a man that he is more often kind than cruel, more often wise than stupid, more often energetic than apathetic or vice versa; but it could never be true to say of one man that he is kind or wise, and of another that he is wicked or stupid. Yet we are always classifying mankind in this way. And it is wrong. Human beings are like rivers; the water is one and the same in all of them but every river is narrow in some places, ﬂows swifter in others; here it is broad, there still, or clear, or cold, or muddy or warm. It is the same with men. Every man bears within him the germs of every human quality, and now manifests one, now another, and frequently he is quite unlike himself, while still remaining the same man.<br/>

— Being an Illuminator is an ideal, and one that most of us will fall short of a lot of the time. But if we try our best toilluminate people with a glowing gaze that is tender, generous, and receptive, we’ll at least be on the right track.<br/>

We will see beyond the cliché character types we often lazily impose on people: the doting grandmother, the tough coach, the hard-charging businessperson. We will be on our way toward improving how we show up in the world.<br/>

“Every epistemology becomes an ethic,” the educator Parker J. Palmer once observed. “The shape of our knowledge becomes the shape of our living; the relation of the knower to the known becomes the relation of the living self to the larger world.” Palmer is saying that the way we attend to others determines the kind of person we become.<br/>

If we see people generously, we will become generous, or if we view them coldly, we will become cold. Palmer’s observation is essential, because he is pointing to a modern answer to an ancient question: How do I become a better person? Over the centuries, male writers and philosophers— think of Immanuel Kant—have built these vast moral systems that portray moral life as something that disinterested, rational individuals do by adhering to abstract universal principles: always treat human beings as an end in themselves, and not as a means to something else. That emphasis on abstract universal principles is ﬁne, I suppose, but it’s impersonal and decontextualized. It’s not about how this one unique person should encounter another unique person. It’s as if these philosophers were so interested in coming up with coherent abstract principles and philosophically impregnable systems that they became afraid of particular people—messy creatures that we are, and the messy situations we ﬁnd ourselves in—and the personal encounters that are the sum and substance of our daily existence.Along comes the philosopher and novelist Iris Murdoch in the second half of the twentieth century, oﬀering us something else. She argues that morality is not mostly about abstract universal principles, or even about making big moral decisions during climactic moments: Do I report fraud when I see it at work? Morality is mostly about how you pay attention to others. Moral behavior happens continuously throughout the day, even during the seemingly uneventful and everyday moments.<br/>

For Murdoch, the essential immoral act is the inability to see other people correctly. Human beings, she ﬁnds, are self-centered beings, anxiety-ridden and resentful. We are constantly representing people to ourselves in self-serving ways, in ways that gratify our egos and serve our ends. We stereotype and condescend, ignore and dehumanize. And because we don’t see people accurately, we treat them wrongly. Evil happens when people are unseeing, when they don’t recognize the personhood in other human beings.<br/>

By contrast, the essential moral act for Murdoch is being able to cast a “just and loving attention” on another person.<br/>

“Love is knowledge of the individual,” she writes. That doesn’t mean you have to romantically swoon for everybody you meet. It means that a good person tries to look at everyone with a patient and discerning regard, tries to resist self-centeredness and overcome prejudice, in order to see another person more deeply and with greater discernment. The good person tries to cast a selﬂess attention and to see what the other person sees. This kind of attention leads to the greatness of small acts: welcoming a newcomer to your workplace, detecting anxiety in somebody’s voice and asking what’s wrong, knowing how to host a party so that everyone feels included. Most of thetime, morality is about the skill of being considerate toward others in the complex situations of life. It’s about being a genius at the close at hand.<br/>

But this kind of attention also does something more profound. To use grand, old-fashioned language, casting this kind of attention makes you a better person. In her celebrated lecture “The Sovereignty of Good over Other Concepts,” Murdoch describes a mother-in-law, whom she calls M, who has contempt for her daughter-in-law, D. The mother-in-law is always perfectly polite to D, but inside, she looks down on her.<br/>

But M is aware that she can be a bit superior, conventional, and old-fashioned. M is also aware that she probably harbors some sense of rivalry with D; they’re competing for her son’s time and aﬀections, after all.<br/>

Perhaps, she realizes, she is seeing D in a way that is unworthy. So one day, as an act of intellectual charity and moral self-improvement, she decides she’s going to change the way she sees D. Before she saw D as “coarse,” but now she resolves to see her as “spontaneous.” Before she thought D was “common,” but now she will see her as “fresh.” M is trying to purge herself of her snobbery and become a better person. This has nothing to do with her outer behavior, which has remained exemplary. It has to do with the puriﬁcation of who she is inside. Good and evil, Murdoch believes, begin in the inner life, and M wants her inner life to be a little nicer and a little less mean.<br/>

Murdoch’s emphasis on how we attend to people is personal, concrete, and very actionable. “Nothing in life is of any value except the attempt to be virtuous,” Murdoch writes. We can, Murdoch writes, “grow by looking.” I ﬁnd this philosophy of moral development tremendously attractive and compelling.— Let me give you an example of somebody who embodies the “just and loving attention” that Murdoch is writing about.<br/>

I’ve interviewed a therapist and author named Mary Pipher a couple of times over the past few years, to get a better idea of how she goes about the business of getting to know people. Pipher has had professional training, of course, but she told me that her trick when doing therapy is to have no tricks, to just engage in a conversation with the patient.<br/>

Being a therapist, she argues, is less about providing solutions and more “a way of paying attention, which is the purest form of love.” She grew up in a town on the Nebraska prairie, amid clashing points of view. She had a rich aunt who was a liberal and a farmer uncle who was a conservative. Her family members ran the gamut from the emotional to the reserved, the travelers to the stay-putters, the sophisticates to the provincials. An education in human variety prepares you to welcome new people into your life.<br/>

“In therapy, as in life, point of view is everything,” Pipher writes in her book Letters to a Young Therapist. In her practice, she projects a happy realism. The old grand masters of her ﬁeld, like Freud, saw people driven by dark drives, repressions, and competitive instincts, but Pipher, who cut her professional teeth as a waitress, sees vulnerable, love-seeking people sometimes caught in bad situations. She tries to inhabit each person’s point of view and see them, sympathetically, as those who are doing the best they can. Her basic viewpoint is charitable to all comers.<br/>

Some therapists try to separate patients from their families. Pipher says that they are quick to see theproblems in a family, give it a label—dysfunctional—and then blame the family for whatever is aﬄicting the patient.<br/>

And, of course, in many cases, families really are abusive and the victims need to break free. But Pipher, characteristically, looks for the good. “While families are imperfect institutions, they are also our greatest source of meaning, connection, and joy,” she writes. “All families are a little crazy, but that is because all humans are a little crazy.” After one diﬀicult family session, she overheard a father oﬀering to take his family out for ice cream. Pipher called them back into her oﬀice to congratulate him on being so generous and kind and watched his eyes well up with tears.<br/>

She doesn’t feel the need to ﬁll the air with a constant stream of words. “Inspiration is very polite,” she writes.<br/>

“She knocks softly and then goes away if we don’t answer the door.” The questions she asks are intended to steer people toward the positive: Isn’t it time you forgave yourself for that? When you and your parents are close again, what will you want them to understand about this time in your life? Early in her career, she tried to understand people by asking how others treated or mistreated them. As she matured, she found it more useful to ask, How do you treat others? How do you make them feel? <br/>

She is oﬀering the kind of attention that can change people.<br/>

Pipher tells the story of another therapist who was working with a mother and daughter who were chronically furious with each other. During one session, they were again going after each other hammer and tong, their comments laced with resentment, criticism, and blame. Then there was a brief silence. The mother broke it bysaying, “I’m thinking of the phrase ‘paint oneself into a corner.’ ” The daughter was shocked. That was the exact phrase that had been circling around in her own mind as she’d tried to think about how she and her mother had gotten themselves into this situation. At that moment, after all the strife, they both cast down their weapons and saw each other diﬀerently. The therapist congratulated the mother and said, “I’ll just leave you two alone to talk about this further.” That’s a moment of illumination.<br/>


