

# A Brief Sanskrit Glossary
# 简短的梵文术语表

# A

rule
**Abhava** : Nonexistence; absence; negation; nothing.

**Abhaya(m)** : “Without fear;” fearlessness; a state of steadfastness in which one is not swayed by fear of
any kind.

**Abheda** : Non-difference; non-duality.

**Abhedananda, Swami** : A direct disciple of Sri Ramakrishna, who spent many years travelling and
teaching Vedanta and Yoga in America.

**Abhimana** : Egoism; conceit; attachment; I-sense; pride; the function of the ego; the delusion of “me”
and “mine;” identification with the body.

**Abhimukti** : Turned toward liberation; the stage in which liberation is assured.

**Abhisheka(m)** : Bathing–the ritual pouring of various items over a sacred image or personage in
homage and worship.

**Abhyasa** : Sustained spiritual practice.

**Achala** : Immovable; not moving; fixed; standing still; firm; steady; unwavering; without change;
mountain.

**Achara** : 1) Immobile. 2) Conduct; good behavior; custom; practice; teaching.

**Acharya** : Teacher; preceptor.

**Achetana** : Unconscious; non-conscious; inanimate; inert; matter.

**Achintya** : Unthinkable; inconceivable; incomprehensible; inexplicable. A title of Brahman because the
mind cannot conceive Its nature.

**Achintya-bhedabheda-vedanta** : A Vedantic school of philosophy founded by Sri Chaitanya
Mahaprabhu called Unthinkable Dualistic Nondualism or Ineffable Difference-In-Identity. It propounds
that there is both difference and non-difference between all individual souls (jiva) and the Absolute


(Brahman), but that this dualistic relation of both difference and non-difference is logically
unthinkable.

**Achintya shakti** : Inscrutable power ineffable force.

**Achit** : Insentient; inert; unconscious; non-conscious; matter; inanimate phenomenal object.

**Achyuta** : Imperishable one–a title of Krishna.

**Adharma** : Unrighteousness; demerit, failure to perform one’s proper duty; unrighteous action;
lawlessness; absence of virtue; all that is contrary to righteousness.

**Adhikara** : Authority; qualification; jurisdiction; prerogative; office; claim; privilege.

**Adhikarin** : An eligible or qualified person; a worthy person. It implies both fitness and capability.

**Adhyatma** : The individual Self; the supreme Self; spirit.

**Adhyatma vidya** : Study of the Self; metaphysics.

**Adhyatmika (Adhyatmic)** : Pertaining to the Self, individual and Supreme.

**Adhyaya** : Chapter; section.

**Adi** : First; origin; beginning; original.

**Adi Purusha** : The First or Original Purusha. See Purusha.

**Adishakti** : Primal Power.

**Aditi** : Boundless; the unbounded; “Infinite Mother”–the source of all the cosmic forms of
consciousness from the physical upwards.

**Aditya** : The sun; the Sun god.

**Adityas** : Solar deities, the greatest of which is Vishnu.

**Adivasi** : Original inhabitants; name denoting the tribals in India.

**Adrishta(m)** : Unseen; invisible; unperceived. This is sometimes applied to God, fate, destiny,
influence, or unseen potency or force.

**Adrishya** : Invisible; that which cannot be perceived by the physical eye.

**Advaita** : Non-dualism; nonduality; literally: “not two.”

**Advaitic** : Non-dual; having to do with the philosophy of Advaita (Non-Dualism).

**Advityia** : Without a second.

**Agama** : Scripture; particularly scriptures dealing with the four topics of temple construction and the
making of images, philosophy, meditation practice, and methods of worship.

**Agami karma** : “Karma-yet-to-come.” The result of acts performed during this present life which will
mature in the normal course of events.


**Agastya** : A sage and reputed seer of many hymns in the Rig Veda.

**Agni** : Vedic god of fire.

**Agnihotra** : “Fire offering;” a Vedic fire sacrifice.

**Aham** : “I am;” “I;” “I” awareness; “I” consciousness; self-consciousness.

**Aham Brahmasmi** : “I am Brahman.” The Mahavakya (Great Saying) of the Brihadaranyaka
Upanishad.

**Ahamkara** : See Ahankara.

**Ahankara** : Egoism or self-conceit; the false “I;” “I” am-ness. It is the self-arrogating principle “I” that
is projected by the mind rather than the real Self. “Ego” (ahankara) is in manifestation whenever “I” is
said or claimed by anything other than the spirit-self.

**Ahimsa** : Non-injury in thought, word, and deed; non-violence; non-killing; harmlessness.

**Airavata** : “Child of the Water,” the white elephant of Indra that was produced by the churning of the
milk ocean.

**Aishwarya** : Dominion; power; lordship; divine glory; majesty; splendor; an attribute of God (Ishwara).

**Ajapa japa** : The natural japa (mantric sounds) made by the breath as it flows in and out.

**Ajara** : Without old age; ageless.

**Ajara Amara Avinashi Atma** : The ageless, immortal, imperishable Self.

**Ajna chakra** : “Command Wheel.” Energy center located at the point between the eyebrows, the “third
eye.” The medulla center opposite the point between the eyebrows.

**Ajnana** : Ignorance; nescience.

**Ajnana timira** : The “glaucoma” of ignorance.

**Akala** : Without parts; an attribute of the Divine Being.

**Akasha** : “Not visible;” ether; space; sky; the subtlest of the five elements; the substance that fills and
pervades the universe; the particular vehicle of life and sound; the element from which the sense of
sound (shabda)–both speech and hearing–arises.

**Akhanda** : Unbroken (literally: “not broken”); indivisible; undivided; whole.

**Aklishta** : Unafflicted; nonafflicted; unmoved.

**Akshara** : Imperishable; indestructible, immutable, undying; undecaying–all in reference to the
individual self and the Supreme Self, Brahman. It also means syllable and is used in reference to the
ekakshara–the one syllable, the One Imperishable: Om.

**Akshaya** : Undecaying; everlasting.

**Alankara** : Ornamentation; the putting of ornaments or decorations on a sacred image.


**Alata chakra** : The illusory circle of fire produced by rapidly waving around a stick that is burning at
one end; symbol of the illusory nature of relative existence–of Maya.

**Alinga** : Without any characteristic or mark.

**Amala** : Without defect; pure; immaculate.

**Amalam** : Free from the impurity of Maya.

**Amara** : Immortal; deathless.

**Amavasya** : New moon day.

**Amba** : Mother; a title of Durga.

**Ambika** : The Mother; a title of Parvati.

**Amrita** : That which makes one immortal. The nectar of immortality that emerged from the ocean of
milk when the gods churned it.

**Anadi** : Beginningless; eternal.

**Anahata** : “Unstruck;” “unbeaten.” Continuous bell-like inner resonance; the heart; the heart chakra;
the inner divine melody (mystic sounds heard by the Yogis); Om.

**Anahata chakra** : “Unstruck.” Energy center located in the spine at the point opposite the center of the
chest (sternum bone). Seat of the Air element.

**Ananda** : Bliss; happiness; joy; delight.

**Anandamaya kosha** : “The sheath of bliss (ananda).” The causal body. The borderline of the Self
(atman).

**Anandamayi Ma** : One of the major spiritual figures in twentieth-century India, first made known to
the West by Paramhansa Yogananda in his Autobiography of a Yogi.

**Ananta(m)** : Infinite; without end; endless; a name of Shesha, the chief of the Nagas, whose coils
encircle the earth and who symbolizes eternity, and upon whom Vishnu reclines.

**Aneka** : Not one–i.e., many.

**Anga** : Limb; individual part; accessory; member; technique.

**Anima** : Little; minute; atomization; the capacity (siddhi) to become as small as one desires–even as
small as an atom.

**Anishta** : Undesirable; bad.

**Anjali** : Two hands held with palms together in salutation; an offering of a handful of flowers.

**Anna(m)** : Food; matter.

**Annamaya kosha** : “The sheath of food (anna).” The physical–or gross–body, made of food.

**Annapurna** : “Full of Food.” A title of the Goddess (Shakti) depicted as the Goddess of Food and


Abundance. The consort of Shiva.

**Anta** : End; extremity.

**Antahkarana** : Internal instrument; fourfold mind; mind, intellect, ego and subconscious mind.

**Antahprajna** : Inner (subjective) consciousness; inwardly cognitive.

**Antara** : Internal; interior; inside; middle.

**Antaratman** : The indwelling (inner) Self; inner soul.

**Antariksha** : Sky; firmament; atmosphere.

**Antarmukha** : Literally “inner face”–inward vision or perception.

**Antaryamana** : Dwelling, guiding, or ruling within.

**Antaryamin** : Indweller; inner guide; inner ruler; the spark of divinity within; the “witness” who dwells
within every living being. This applies to both the jivatma and the Paramatma. (Antar–within/inner;
and yamin–guide.)

**Anu** : Atom; atomic; elementary particle; minute; that which cannot further divided; an individual
being.

**Anubhava** : Perception; direct personal experience; spiritual experience; intuitive consciousness;
knowledge.

**Anuswara** : Bindu.

**Anusandhana** : Enquiry or investigation; in Vedanta, enquiry or investigation into the nature of
Brahman.

**Anushthana** : Observance; religious exercise; repetition of a mantra for a set number of times during a
given period; systematic performance of religious practices, usually undertaken for some definite
period of time.

**Anuttara** : “Beyond which there is nothing;” the Highest, the Supreme; the Absolute.

**Anvaya-vyatireka** : Positive and negative assertions; proof by assertion and negation. Just as several
kinds of dal are mixed together, so also, the Atman is mixed with the five koshas. You will have to
separate the Self from the five sheaths. You will have to separate name and form from Existence-
Knowledge-Bliss Absolute. Anvaya and vyatireka processes always go together. The Self exists in the
five sheaths, yet it is not the sheaths. This is Vedantic sadhana. The aspirant rejects the names and
forms and the five sheaths and realizes the one, all-pervading, indivisible, infinite, eternal, unchanging
essence, viz., Brahman.

**Ap/Apah** : Water; one of the five elements, from which the sense of taste (rasa) arises.

**Apaishunam** : Absence of calumny; aversion to fault-finding.

**Apana** : The prana that moves downward, producing the excretory functions in general.

**Aparigraha** : Non-possessiveness, non-greed, non-selfishness, non-acquisitiveness.


**Aparoksha** : Immediate; direct.

**Aparoksha anubhuti** : The direct, immediate, intuitive experience or perception of the invisible–the
realization of Brahman. The title of a treatise on Advaita Vedanta by Shankaracharya.

**Apta** : A trustworthy person.

**Aradhana** : Worship of the Divine; adoration; self-surrender.

**Arani** : Sacrificial wood stick for creating fire through friction.

**Aranyaka** : “Forest book;” philosophical, symbolic, and spiritual interpretations of the Vedic hymns
and rituals. Mainly meant for forest-dwelling ascetics (vanaprasthas).

**Arati** : A ceremony of worship in which lights, incense, camphor, and other offerings representing the
five elements and the five senses–the totality of the human being–are waved before an image or symbol
of the Divine.

**Aratrika** : See Arati.

**Archa** : Worship; adoration.

**Archanam** : Worship of a sacred image.

**Ardhangini** : Partner in life (wife); especially Parvati, the wife of Lord Siva.

**Arghya** : Offering made in ritualistic worship. Sometimes an offering of flowers, bel leaves, sandal
paste, durva grass, and rice together.

**Arjava** : Straightforwardness; honesty; rectitude (from the verb root rinj: “to make straight.”)

**Artha** : Wealth; object; thing. It is the secular value which is both desired and desirable. It satisfies the
acquisitive tendency in individuals. It is the economic value.

**Artharthi** : One who desires material gain (artha).

**Arupa** : Formless.

**Arya(n)** : One who is an Arya–literally, “one who strives upward.” Both Arya and Aryan are
exclusively psychological terms having nothing whatsoever to do with birth, race, or nationality. In his
teachings Buddha habitually referred to spiritually qualified people as “the Aryas.” Although in English
translations we find the expressions: “The Four Noble Truths,” and “The Noble Eightfold Path,”
Buddha actually said: “The Four Aryan Truths,” and “The Eightfold Aryan Path.”

**Aryaman** : Chief of the Pitris.

**Asambhava** : Total inapplicability; impossibility.

**Asamprajñata samadhi** : Highest superconscious state where the mind and the ego-sense are
completely annihilated.

**Asana** : Posture; seat; Hatha Yoga posture.

**Asanga** : Non-attachment; without attachment.


**Asat** : Unreal[ity]; nonbeing; nonexistence; false; falsehood.

**Asatya** : Unreal; untrue.

**Ashanti** : Absence of peace of mind; restlessness; distraction.

**Ashaucha** : Impurity.

**Ashram(a)** : A place for spiritual discipline and study, usually a monastic residence. Also a stage of life.
In Hinduism life is divided ideally into four stages (ashramas): 1) the celibate student life
(brahmacharya); 2) the married household life (grihastha); 3) the life of retirement (seclusion) and
contemplation (vanaprastha); 4) the life of total renunciation (sannyasa).

**Ashramite** : Resident of an ashram.

**Ashta** : Eight.

**Ashtami** : Eighth; eighth day (of the lunar month).

**Ashtanga Yoga** : The “eight-limbed” Yoga of Patanjali consisting of yama, niyama, asana, pranayama,
pratyahara, dharana, dhyana, and samadhi. (See separate entries for each “limb.”)

**Ashwattha** : The pipal (sacred fig) tree, in the Bhagavad Gita, the eternal tree of life whose roots are in
heaven. The “world tree” in the sense of the axis of the earth and even of the cosmos.

**Ashwins** : Two Vedic deities, celestial horsemen of the sun, always together, who herald the dawn and
are skilled in healing. They avert misfortune and sickness and bring treasures.

**Ashubha** : Inauspicious unfortunate.

**Ashuddha** : Impure; unpurified; incorrect.

**Asmita** : I-ness; the sense of “I am;” “I exist.”

**Asteya** : Non-stealing; honesty; non-misappropriativeness.

**Astra(m)** : Weapon.

**Asura** : Demon; evil being (a-sura: without the light).

**Asurim** : The state of an asura, one who dwells in darkness (a-sura–without the light). The condition of
those negative souls who are turned away from divinity and moving further into degradation of
consciousness and mode of life.

**Aswara** : Without sound, accent, or tone.

**Ashwattha** : The pipal (sacred fig) tree, the eternal tree of life whose roots are in heaven. The “world
tree” in the sense of the axis of the earth and even of the cosmos.

**Atma(n)** : The individual spirit or self.

**Atmabhava** : The nature of the Self; awareness of the self; feeling: “I am the Self.”

**Atmadrishti** : The seeing or sight of the Self (atma); the vision of the Self; knowledge of the Self
through direct vision or knowing.


**Atmajnana** : Knowledge of the Self.

**Atmanubhava** : Self-realization; perception/experience of the Self.

**Atmashakti** : Power of the Self; personal power or strength.

**Atmavichara** : Enquiry into the Self.

**Atmavidya** : Teaching about the Self and its reality; knowledge of the Self.

**Atmic** : Having to do with the atma–spirit or self.

**Aurobindo Ghosh** , Sri: One of India’s greatest yogis and spiritual writers, he was at first involved in
the Indian freedom movement, but came to see that yoga was the true path to freedom. His ashram in
South India became one of the major spiritual centers in modern India, and his voluminous spiritual
writings are read and prized throughout the world.

**Avadhuta** : “Cast off” (one who has cast off the world utterly). A supreme ascetic and jnani who has
renounced all worldly attachments and connections and lives in a state beyond body consciousness,
whose behavior is not bound by ordinary social conventions. Usually they wear no clothing. The
highest state of asceticism or tapas.

**Avatar(a)** : A Divine Incarnation.

**Avidya** : Ignorance; nescience; unknowing; literally: “to know not.”

**Avinashi** : Indestructible; imperishable.

**Avyakta(m)** : Unmanifest; invisible; the undifferentiated; the state when the three gunas are in perfect
equilibrium; in Sankhya philosophy a term for Prakriti.

**Ayam Atma Brahma** : “This Self is Brahman.” The Mahavakya (Great Saying) of the Mandukya
Upanishad).

**Ayurveda** : “Life-knowledge.” The ancient system of Indian medicine formulated by the sage
Dhanvantari and considered part of the Vedic revelation.

# B

```
rule
```
**Badarayana** : “Inhabitant of Badarika Ashrama” a title of the sage Vyasa.

**Badrinath** : One of the major centers of Hindu pilgrimage, sacred to Vishnu, located in the heart of the
Himalayas.

**Bala brahmacharya** : Brahmacharya observed from childhood (bala).

**Bandha** : “Lock;” bond; bondage; tie or knot.

**Bhadra** : Blessing; happy; well.

**Bhagavad Gita** : “The Song of God.” The sacred philosophical text often called “the Hindu Bible,” part
of the epic Mahabharata by Vyasa; the most popular sacred text in Hinduism.


**Bhagavan** : The Lord; the Personal God. From bhag–splendor and power–and van–Master or possessor
(of splendor and power). Bhagavan possesses six divine attributes: knowledge (jnana), strength (bala),
lordship (aishwarya), potency or power (shakti), creative power or might (virya), and splendor/radiance
(tejas). See Ishwara.

**Bhagavata** : A devotee of God (Bhagavan) or Vishnu.

**Bhagavatam** : Srimad Bhagavatam. A major purana devoted to the glory and worship of Vishnu and his
incarnation as Krishna. The major scripture of the Vaishnavas.

**Bhagavati** : Goddess; the feminine form of Bhagavan.

**Bhairavi** : A nun of the Tantric sect.

**Bhajan(a)** : Devotional singing; a devotional song.

**Bhakta** : Devotee; votary.

**Bhakti** : Devotion; love (of God).

**Bhakti Marga** : The path of devotion leading to union with God.

**Bhakti Yoga** : The yoga of attaining union with God through the prescribed spiritual discipline of the
path of devotion.

**Bhakti Yogi** : One who practices Bhakti Yoga.

**Bhaktivedanta (Swami)** : The founder of the Hari Krishna movement in America.

**Bharat(a)** : The proper Sanskrit name for India.

**Bharat Giri Maharaj** : Bharat Giri Maharaj was a Gujarati sadhu who visited America in the summer
of 1999. At his passing in 2002 he was between one hundred and thirty or one hundred and forty years
of age, a great yogi and visionary. What it was to be in his presence is beyond description, but the
exaltedness of his consciousness was very obvious. Therefore I include his words on the Pranava in this
section.

**Bharati** : Indian

**Bharatvarsha** : The land of India.

**Bhasha** : Language; gentle and holy talk.

**Bhashma** : Ash, usually from the sacred fire sacrifice.

**Bhashya** : Commentary.

**Bhava (1)** : Becoming, from the verb “bhu” or “bhavh” which means to become or to exist.

**Bhava (2)** : Subjective state of being (existence); attitude of mind; mental attitude or feeling; state of
realization in the heart or mind.

**Bhava samadhi** : Superconscious state attained by bhaktas or devotees through intense divine emotion.

**Bhavanam** : Meditation. “Bhavanam is setting the heart on the Lord Who is designated by Om and


brought into the mind by It.” (Shankara, Commentary on the Yoga Sutras)

**Bhavani** : “Giver of Existence;” a title of the Divine Mother.

**Bhaya** : Fear; terror.

**Bheda** : Difference; separation.

**Bhiksha** : Almsfood–food obtained by begging or that is offered to a monk.

**Bhikshu** : One who lives on bhiksha (almsfood); a mendicant; a sannyasi; a Buddhist monk.

**Bhoga** : Enjoyment, pleasure; experience; perception; also food (usually what has been offered to a
deity).

**Bhogya** : Object of experience or enjoyment.

**Bhokta** : Enjoyer; experiencer; subject

**Bhranti** : Delusion; wrong notion; false idea or impression.

**Bhrigu** : An ancient sage, so illustrious that he mediated quarrels among the gods.

**Bhuh** : The earth; the material world/plane.

**Bhukti** : Enjoyment; material enjoyment.

**Bhuloka** : The material world/plane of atomic matter.

**Bhuma** : The unconditioned Infinite; Brahman.

**Bhumi** : The earth; realm.

**Bhuta** : A spirit. Some bhutas are subhuman nature spirits or “elementals”, but some are earthbound
human spirits–ghosts. Bhutas may be either positive or negative.

**Bhuta** : What has come into being; an entity as opposed to the unmanifested; any of the five elementary
constituents of the universe (panchabhuta); element.

**Bhutapanchaka** : The Five Elements: ether, air, fire, water, and earth.

**Bhuvaloka** : The lesser astral world, similar to the material plane (Bhuloka).

**Bhuvana** : The universe; the world.

**Bodha** : Consciousness; knowledge; intelligence; spiritual wisdom; “to be awake;” enlightenment.

**Bodhi** : Enlightenment; “to be awakened.”

**Bija** : Seed; source.

**Bija Mantra** : A “seed” mantra from which realization grows as a tree from a seed; usually a single-
syllable mantra that is called “seed” because of its small size as a dot or point of sound.

**Bindu** : Point; dot; seed; source; the point from which the subtle Omkara arises that is experienced in
meditation.


**Brahma** : The Creator (Prajapati) of the three worlds of men, angels, and archangels (Bhur, Bhuwah,
and Swah); the first of the created beings; Hiranyagarbha or cosmic intelligence.

**Brahma satyam** ; jagan mithya; jivo brahmaiva naparah: “Brahman is real. The world is illusory. The
jiva is nondifferent from Brahman.” This is Shankara’s renowned “Vedanta in half a verse.”

**Brahma Sutras** : A treatise by Vyasa on Vedanta philosophy in the form of aphorisms. Also called the
Vedanta Sutras or Vedanta Darshana.

**Brahma-anubhava** : Direct personal experience of Brahman.

**Brahmabhavanam** : Meditation on Brahman; feeling of identity with Brahman, as well as of
everything as Brahman.

**Brahmachari** : One who observes continence; a celibate student in the first stage of life (ashrama).

**Brahmacharini** : Female “brahmachari.”

**Brahmacharya** : Continence; self-restraint on all levels; discipline.

**Brahma-chintana** : Constant meditation on Brahman; constant thought of or awareness of God.

**Brahmajnana** : Direct, transcendental knowledge of Brahman; Self-realization.

**Brahmajnani** : One who possess Brahmajnana.

**Brahmajyoti** : The Light of God.

**Brahmaloka** : The world (loka) of Brahma, the Creator; the highest heaven; the world of supreme joy.
Those who each this plane of existence after death are beyond rebirth.

**Brahmamaya** : Formed of Brahman; filled with Brahman.

**Brahmamuhurta** : “The muhurta of Brahman.” The period of one and a half hours before sunrise
(sometime between 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.), which is said to be the best time for meditation and
worship.

**Brahman** : The Absolute Reality; the Truth proclaimed in the Upanishads; the Supreme Reality that is
one and indivisible, infinite, and eternal; all-pervading, changeless Existence; Existence-knowledge-
bliss Absolute (Satchidananda); Absolute Consciousness; it is not only all-powerful but all-power itself;
not only all-knowing and blissful but all-knowledge and all-bliss itself.

**Brahmana** : A knower of Brahman. A Brahmin. A Vedic liturgical text explaining the rituals found in
the Vedic samhitas (collection of hymns). A guidebook for performing those rites.

**Brahmanda** : “The egg of Brahma” or “the Brahmic egg.” The cosmic “egg;” the universe; the cosmos;
the macrocosm.

**Brahmanishtha** : Remaining steadfast in the Absolute (Brahman). One who is firmly established in the
Supreme being, in the direct knowledge of Brahman, the Absolute Reality.

**Brahmarandhra** : “The hole of Brahman,” the subtle (astral) aperture in the crown of the head. Said to
be the gateway to the Absolute (Brahman) in the thousand-petaled lotus (sahasrara) in the crown of the
head. Liberated beings are said to exit the physical body through this aperture at death.


**Brahma-sakshatkara** : Realization of Brahman; direct experience of the Absolute Being.

**Brahmavadin** : Literally “one who walks the path of Brahman.” One who advocates that there is one
existence alone–Parabrahman.

**Brahmavichara** : Enquiry into the Absolute (Brahman).

**Brahmavidya** : Science of Brahman; knowledge of Brahman; learning pertaining to Brahman or the
Absolute Reality.

**Brahmic** : Divine; pertaining to God (Brahman).

**Brahmin (Brahmana)** : A knower of Brahman; a member of the highest Hindu caste consisting of
priests, pandits, philosophers, and religious leaders.

**Brihaspati** : The guru–priest and teacher–of the gods.

**Brihat** : The great; the large.

**Buddha** : An awakened one (from the root verb budh: to enlighten, to know).

**Buddhi** : Intellect; understanding; reason; intelligence; the thinking mind. Derived from the root verb
budh: to enlighten, to know.

**Buddhi Yoga** : The Yoga of Intelligence spoken of in the Bhagavad Gita which later came to be called
Jnana Yoga, the Yoga of Knowledge.

# C

```
rule
```
**Caste** : See Varna.

**Chakra** : Wheel. Plexus; center of psychic energy in the human system, particularly in the spine or
head.

**Chaitanya** : The consciousness that knows itself and knows others; absolute consciousness.

**Chakshuh** : Eye; the subtle organ of sight; visual sense.

**Chamatkara** : Remarkable traits and abilities; cleverness; shining forth with divine glory.

**Chanda** : Silver; the moon.

**Chandala** : An outcaste of the lowest level, so degraded that he eats dogs; wild; bad; untouchable.

**Chandra** : The moon; the presiding deity of the moon or the astral lunar world (loka).

**Chandraloka** : The subtle world, “the world of the moon.”

**Chandrayana Vrata** : An observance in which, beginning with fifteen morsels of food on a full-moon
day, a person lessens them one by one daily, until he takes no food on the new moon day; and again
increases them one by one till he reaches the same fifteen morsels on the next full-moon day.

**Charana** : Foot.


**Charu** : A preparation of boiled rice, milk, sugar and ghee, to be offered into the fire for gods; a sattvic
dietary regimen usually taken by yoga-practitioners and celibates. Havishya.

**Charvaka** : The Indian materialistic school, also known as Lokayata (“restricted to the world of
common experience”). Its central teaching is that matter is the only reality, and sense perception is the
only valid means of knowledge or proof. Therefore sense satisfaction is the only goal.

**Charya** : Activity; mode of behavior; a way of life–as in brahmacharya.

**Chela** : Disciple.

**Chetana** : Consciousness; volition; intelligence.

**Chidakasha** : “The Space (Ether) of Consciousness.” The infinite, all-pervading expanse of
Consciousness from which all “things” proceed; the subtle space of Consciousnesss in the Sahasrara
(Thousand-petalled Lotus). The true “heart” of all things.

**Chinmaya** : Full of consciousness; formed of consciousness.

**Chinta** : Enquiry; thought; discussion.

**Chintana** : Thinking; reflecting.

**Chit** : Consciousness (that is spirit or purusha); “to perceive, observe, think, be aware, know;” pure
unitary Consciousness.

**Chitraratha** : The chief of the gandharvas.

**Chitshakti** : Power of consciousness or intelligence.

**Chitta** : The subtle energy that is the substance of the mind.

**Chittashuddhi** : Purification of the mind; purity of conscience.

**Chitta-vritti-nirodha** : Cessation of the modifications of the mind; control of thoughts; Patanjali’s
definition of Yoga.

**Crore** : Ten million.

# D

```
rule
```
**Dacoit** : A violent thief who preys on travellers, sometimes killing them.

**Daityas** : Demons who constantly war with the gods. Sometimes “races” or nationalities who acted
contrary to dharma and fought against the “aryas” were also called demons (daityas or asuras).

**Daivim** : The state of a deva or “shining one;” the quality of those positive souls who are progressing
toward divinity.

**Dakshina** : Gift; priestly gift; sacrificial fee.

**Dakshinamurti** : A name for Lord Shiva as the silent teacher. Vedic Religion declares that in every
cycle of creation God manifests as Dakshinamurti and becomes the guru of the first human beings–


those who were most spiritually evolved in the previous creation–teaching them the path to liberation
(moksha).

**Dakshinayana** : “The southern way/path.” The solar year is divided into two halves. The dakshinayana,
beginning on the summer solstice (June 21), the first day of summer (also called dakshinayana) is when
the sun appears to begin moving southward for the next six months. See Uttarayana.

**Dakshineshwar** : A village on the Ganges about five miles north of Calcutta, where, in the 1850’s, the
Rani Rasmani built a compound of temples: the Kali temple, twelve small Shiva temples, and the
Radhakanta (Radha-Krishna) temple. Just north of the northernmost Shiva temple is the room which
Sri Ramakrishna occupied for a considerable part of his life.

**Dama** : Self-control; control of the senses; restraint.

**Damaru** : A small, hand held drum with two heads that is sounded by twisting the wrist and causing a
ball tied to its middle to rhythmically strike the heads alternately.

**Dana** : “Giving;” gift; charity; almsgiving; self-sacrifice; donation; generosity.

**Danava** : A demon; an evil spirit.

**Danda** : Stick; staff; rod; particularly the staff carried by a sannyasi; punishment; chastisement.

**Darshan** : Literally “sight” or “seeing.” Darshan is the seeing of a holy being as well as the blessing
received by seeing such a one.

**Dasah** : Servant; slave.

**Dasanami** : “Ten named.” A term for members of the monastic order of Shankaracharya headquartered
in the four quarters of India (Sringeri, Dwaraka, Badrinath and Jagannath Puri). After their proper
monastic names they add one of ten titles (Saraswati, Bharati, Puri, Tirtha, Ashrama, Giri, Parvata,
Sagara, Vanam, Aranya) according to their monastic succession.

**Dasya** : The attitude of being a servant of God.

**Dasyu** : Slave; a name for non-Aryans in the Rig Veda.

**Dattatreya** : A famous sage, son of the Rishi Atri and Anasuya. His birth was a divine boon, hence his
name: Datta–“given”–and atreya–“son of Atri.” Considered a divine incarnation and known as the Lord
of Avadhutas, he is often revered as the embodiment of the Supreme Guru. He is credited with the
authorship of the Avadhuta Gita, the Jivanmukti Gita, and the Tripura Rahashya.

**Daya** : Mercy; compassion; grace; empathy.

**Dayananda (Maharishi Swami)** : A leading reformer within Hinduism in the nineteenth century and
the founder of the Arya Samaj.

**Dehadhyasa** : False identification with the body.

**Desha** : Place; spatial location; country.

**Deva** : “A shining one,” a god–greater or lesser in the evolutionary hierarchy; a semi-divine or celestial
being with great powers, and therefore a “god.” Sometimes called a demi-god. Devas are the demigods
presiding over various powers of material and psychic nature.


**Devaloka** : “The world of shining beings;” the world of the gods; heaven; one of the higher subtler
worlds.

**Devanagari** : “Divine city;” the Sanskrit script.

**Devata** : Godhead; divinity; celestial being. See Deva.

**Devayana** : The way/path of the gods. Also called The Northern Way/Path–Uttarayana–when the sun
seems to move northward. Those who follow this in its spiritual sense attain Brahmaloka and usually
do not return to earth. It is the way of faith and asceticism. At death, those who attain liberation by
ascending in the Devayana never return to the cycle of birth and death.

**Devi** : “Shining One;” Goddess; the Supreme Shakti (Divine Power) or Divine Mother, or a
demigoddess.

**Dhama** : Abode; dwelling; place of residence.

**Dharana** : Concentration of mind; fixing the mind upon a single thing or point.

**Dharma** : The righteous way of living, as enjoined by the sacred scriptures and the spiritually
illumined; characteristics; virtue.

**Dharma-megha samadhi** : The final state of one-pointedness, when an individual becomes
disinterested even in omniscience, omnipotence, and omnipresence. This state of superconsciousness or
samadhi is called dharma-megha–cloud of virtue–inasmuch as it showers nectar drops of immortality
through knowledge of Brahman, when all the hosts of vasanas are entirely destroyed.

**Dharma shastras** : Scriptures which set forth the rules for society and individuals, including spiritual
observances. Manu Smriti is the most authoritative–and the foundation–of all the dharmashastras of
India.

**Dharmashala** : A place for pilgrims to stay, either free of charge or at a minimal cost.

**Dharmic** : Having to do with dharma; of the character of dharma.

**Dhatri** : Giver; a name for God; creator; establisher.

**Dhatu** : Element; original element; core; constituent; the vital force in the human being.

**Dhira** : Steadfast; strong; bold; courageous. One who possesses these qualities.

**Dhoti** : A long piece of material worn around the waist by traditionally-dressed men in India, rather like
a long skirt.

**Dhriti** : Steadfast; constant; attraction; sustaining effort; firmness; patience; endurance.

**Dhuni** : A fire lighted by wandering monks, beside which they meditate and sleep.

**Dhvani** : Tone: sound; word; the subtle aspect of the vital shakti or the jiva in the vibrations.

**Dhyana(m)** : Meditation; contemplation.

**Dhyeya** : Object of meditation or worship; purpose behind action.


**Diksha** : Initiation; dedication; consecration.

**Dipa** : A wick lamp fed by oil or ghee; a flame in a lamp.

**Divya** : Divine; celestial; divine nature; luminous; supernatural.

**Divya chakshuh** : Divine eye; the heavenly eye; wisdom.

**Divya shakti** : Divine energy or power.

**Dosha** : Defect; imperfection; blemish; fault; shortcoming. In Yoga philosophy there are five doshas:
lust (kama), anger (krodha), greed (lobha), delusion (moha), and envy (matsarya).

**Dosha drishti** : Seeing the defects in samsara and samsaric life.

**Drashta** : The pure consciousness comprehending all objects; perceiver; seer; purusha; subject.

**Drik** : See Drashta.

**Drishta** : The visible; see; that which is perceived.

**Drishti** : Seeing; sight; vision; view; inner sight; opinion; gaze; perception.

**Drishya** : Visible; object seen; perceived; objects of consciousness; the world; that which can be seen
by the physical sense.

**Dukha(m)** : Pain; suffering; misery; sorrow; grief; unhappiness; stress or distress; that which is
unsatisfactory or produces dukha.

**Durga** : “Incomprehensible One;” “Difficult to reach;” the Universal Mother; she rides a lion (or tiger)
and carries a weapon in each of her eight arms symbolizing the powers of the Self against ignorance
and evil. She is invoked against all forms of evil–physical and metaphysical. Considered the consort,
the shakti, of Shiva.

**Dwaita** : Dual; duality; dualism.

**Dwandwa(s)** : The pairs of opposites in nature (prakriti) such as pleasure and pain, hot and cold, light
and darkness, gain and loss, victory and defeat, love and hatred.

**Dwandwamoha** : The delusion of the pairs of opposites.

**Dwapara Yuga** : The Bronze Age. See Yuga.

**Dwesha** : Aversion/avoidance for something, implying a dislike for it. This can be emotional
(instinctual) or intellectual. It may range from simple nonpreference to intense repulsion, antipathy and
even hatred. See Raga.

**Dwija** : “Twice born;” any member of the three upper castes that has received the sacred thread
(yajnopavita).

**Dwipa** : Island; continent.


# E

```
rule
```
**Eka** : One; unique; Reality.

**Ekadashi** : “The eleventh.” The eleventh day of each half of the lunar month (that is, the eleventh day
after the new and full moons) that is devoted to the worship of Vishnu and his avataras.

**Ekadashi Vrata** : Observing ekadhashi (the eleventh day after the new and full moons, sacred to
Vishnu) by fasting–through abstinence from grains and other staples and eating much less than usual,
oftentimes fasting from food (and sometimes water) until after sundown.

**Ekagrata** : One-pointedness of the mind; concentration; close attention.

**Ekakshara** : A common term for Om meaning “the Single Syllable” or “the Single Letter.”

**Ekam-eva-advitiyam** : “One, only, without a second.” A description of Brahman.

**Eva(m)** : Only; in fact; thus; so; in this manner; without limitation.

# G

```
rule
```
**Gaja** : Elephant.

**Gambhira** : Deep; magnanimous; dignified; grand; imperious; grave.

**Ganapati** : “Lord of the Ganas” (the spirits that always accompany Shiva). See Ganesha.

**Gandha** : Smell; fragrance.

**Gandharva** : A demigod–a celestial musician and singer.

**Ganesha** : The elephant-headed son of Shiva and Parvati; the remover of obstacles; lord (pati) of the
ganas (spirits that always accompany Shiva); god of wisdom; god of beginnings; the granter of success
is spiritual and material life; in ritual worship he is worshipped first, and is therefore known as Adi-
deva, the First God.

**Ganga** : See Ganges.

**Ganges (Ganga)** : The sacred river–believed to be of divine origin–that flows from high up in the
Himalayas, through the plains of Northern India, and empties into the Bay of Bengal. Hindus consider
that bathing in the Ganges profoundly purifies both body and mind.

**Ganja** : Indian hemp; a form of marijuana found in India.

**Garuda** : A great being who can assume bird form, and therefore considered the king of birds. Often
depicted as an eagle, he is the vehicle of Vishnu.

**Gatha** : Verse; stanza.

**Gaudapada** : The guru of Shankara’s guru, Govindapada.

**Gauh (Go)** : Cow.


**Gauri** : “The Golden One.” A title of the Divine Mother, consort of Shiva.

**Gayatri Mantra** : A Rig Vedic mantra in the gayatri meter invoking the solar powers of evolution and
enlightenment.

**Gayatri Meter** : A meter found only in the Rig Veda, consisting of three lines of eight syllables each. It
is considered especially appropriate for mantric invocation of deities before worship.

**Gerua** : The brownish-orange mud used to dye the clothing of Hindu monastics; the color produced by
dyeing with gerua is also called gerua.

**Ghat** : A stairway leading down to a river, pond, or water reservoir.

**Ghatashuddi** : “Purifying the ‘pot.’” Purification of the physical body. An expression of Hatha Yoga,
referring to the “earthen pot” of the body.

**Ghee** : Clarified butter.

**Giri** : Mountain.

**Gita** : The Bhagavad Gita.

**Gopa** : Cowherd boy; male counterpart of the gopis.

**Gopala** : Cowherd; master of the cows; a title of Krishna the cowherd boy.

**Gopi** : Milkmaid; childhood companions and devotees of Krishna.

**Gopinath Kaviraj (Mahamahopadyaya Sri)** : Gopinath Kaviraj was considered to be the greatest
scholar of modern India, so much so that many Indian book catalogs devoted an entire section to his
books alone.

**Gopuram** : A towerlike structure over an entrance (gateway) to a temple or temple compound, shaped
like a wedge standing on its wide end, consisting of many tiers that are highly decorated (sculpted),
often with images of deities and figures from Hindu cosmology.

**Goshala** : Cow shed.

**Gotra** : Clan; family; lineage.

**Govinda** : Chief of cowherds–a title of Krishna.

**Griha** : Home; house; temple.

**Grihasta** : A married “householder;” the second stage (ashrama) in life.

**Grihya sutras** : Scriptures (dharmashastras) setting down the way of life to be observed by Grihastas.

**Guha** : Cave; the heart (hridaya guha).

**Guhya** : Secret; secret place.

**Guna** : Quality, attribute, or characteristic arising from nature (Prakriti) itself; a mode of energy
behavior. As a rule, when “guna” is used it is in reference to the three qualities of Prakriti, the three
modes of energy behavior that are the basic qualities of nature, and which determine the inherent


characteristics of all created things. They are: 1) sattwa–purity, light, harmony; 2) rajas–activity,
passion; and 3) tamas–dullness, inertia, and ignorance.

**Gunatita** : Beyond the gunas; the state of transcendence of the gunas–freedom from their conditionings.

**Guru** : Teacher; preceptor.

**Guru Nanak** : Founder of the Sikh religion.

**Gurukula** : “Teacher’s school” or “teacher’s abode.” A gurukula is the residence of a spiritual teacher
where young students (brahmacharis) came to live and learn.

# H

```
rule
```
**Hamsah** : “I am He;” swan.

**Hanuman** : A powerful monkey chief of extraordinary strength and prowess, whose exploits are
celebrated in the epic Ramayana, the life of Rama. He was an ideal devotee (bhakta) and servant of
Lord Rama.

**Hara** : “One who takes away;” a title of Shiva; the destroyer; the remover.

**Hari** : Vishnu.

**Harikatha** : Literally “Hari [Vishnu] Story,” a hari katha is a narration of the life and deeds of a deity or
saint, interspersed with songs relevant to the events being spoken about or actual poetic reflections on
those events and their significance. Kirtan is often a part, as well. This is the most popular and
widespread traditional form of spiritual “entertainment.”

**Harsha** : Joy; exhilaration; excitement.

**Hatha yoga** : A system of Yoga consisting of physical exercises, postures, and breathing exercises for
gaining control over the physical body and prana.

**Havishya** : Sacrificial food. See Charu.

**Havan** : Fire sacrifice.

**Havan kunda** : Pit or receptacle for the fire sacrifice.

**Himsa** : Injury, violence; killing.

**Hiranyagarbha** : “Golden egg;” cosmic womb; cosmic intelligence; the Supreme Lord of the universe;
also called Brahman. It can also refer to Brahma the creator of the three lower worlds.

**Holy Mother** : A reference to Sri Sarada Devi (Saradamani Mukhopadhyaya), the wife of Sri
Ramakrishna, believed by many to have been an incarnation of the Divine Mother.

**Homa** : Vedic fire ritual/sacrifice.

**Hridaya** : Heart; center or core of something; essence; the space (akasha) where the inbreath and
outbreath merge–this is the true heart.


**Hridayaguha** : “The Cave of the Heart,” the core of our being wherein the Self dwells.

**Hrishikesha** : The bristling (or bushy) haired one. A title of Krishna.

# I

```
rule
```
**Iccha (Ichchha)** : Desire; will; wish; free will; the divine will.

**Iccha (Ichchha) shakti** : The power/force of desire; power/force of will; Shakti in the aspect of divine
will.

**Ida** : The subtle channel that extends from the base of the spine to the medulla on the left side of the
spine.

**Indra** : King of the lesser “gods” (demigods).

**Indriya** : Organ. The five organs of perception (jnanendriyas) are the ear, skin, eye, tongue, and nose.
The five organs of action (karmendriyas) are the voice, hand, foot, organ of excretion, and the organ of
generation.

**Isha** : Lord; master; ruler; Ishwara.

**Ishana** : The all-enjoyer; Lord of everything; Lord of space.

**Ishta-devata** : Beloved deity. The deity preferred above all others by an individual. “Chosen ideal” is
the usual English translation.

**Ishta mantra** : The mantra of the divine form specially beloved by an individual (ishta devata).

**Ishwara** : “God” or “Lord” in the sense of the Supreme Power, Ruler, Master, or Controller of the
cosmos. “Ishwara” implies the powers of omnipotence, omnipresence, and omniscience. See Bhagavan.

**Ishwarapranidhana** : Offering of one’s life to God (Ishwara).

**Ishwari** : The Divine Cosmic Mother; the feminine form of Ishwara.

**Itihasa** : “Thus spoken”–history; technical term for the Ramayana and Mahabharata.

# J

```
rule
```
**Jada** : Inert; unconscious; matter.

**Jagadguru** : “World guru;” world teacher.

**Jagat** : World; cosmos.

**Jagrat** : The waking state.

**Jala** : Water.

**Janaka** : The most renowned philosopher-king of ancient India, ruler of Mithila and father of Sita, the
wife of Rama. Mentioned in the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad, he is considered the prime example of one
who has attained total fulfillment in both material and spiritual life simultaneously without slighting


either.

**Janaloka** : The world that embraces both the highest astral levels and the lower causal levels.

**Janardana** : Agitator of men (properly an epithet of Vishnu)–a title of Krishna.

**Janma** : Birth.

**Janmotsava** : Birthday celebration.

**Japa** : Repetition of a mantra.

**Jata** : Long matted hair.

**Jati** : Birth; class; class notions; family; species.

**Jaya** : Victory; victorious; mastery; hail; salutations.

**Jayanti** : Birth day; victorious; conquering.

**Jitendriya** : One who has controlled the indriyas–the senses.

**Jiva** : Individual spirit; embodied spirit; living entity; life..

**Jivanmukta** : One who is liberated in this present life.

**Jivanmukti** : Liberation in this life.

**Jivatma** (n): Individual spirit. See Jiva.

**Jnana** : Knowledge; wisdom; knowledge of the Reality or Brahman, the Absolute.

**Jnana Marga** : The path of discriminative knowledge leading to union with God.

**Jnana Yoga** : The path of knowledge; meditation through wisdom; constantly and seriously thinking on
the true nature of the Self as taught by the upanishads.

**Jnanamaya kosha** : “The sheath of intellect (buddhi).” The level of intelligent thought and
conceptualization. Sometimes called the Vijnanamaya kosha. The astral-causal body.

**Jnanata** : Consciousness.

**Jnanendriya** : The five organs of perception: ear, skin, eye, tongue, and nose.

**Jnani** : A follower of the path of knowledge (jnana); one who has realized–who knows–the Truth
(Brahman).

**Jnanopadesha** : Instruction in wisdom (jnana).

**Jyoti(h)** : Light; flame; illumination; luminosity; effulgence.

**Jyotisha** : Astrology; astronomy.


# K

```
rule
```
**Kabir** : An Indian mystic of the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries.

**Kailash(a)** : “Crystalline;” the name of the mountain home of Siva–a mountain peak in the Himalayas
(in present-day Tibet) revered as the abode of Shiva, that is a famous place of pilgrimage.

**Kaivalya** : Transcendental state of Absolute Independence; Moksha; isolation; final beatitude;
emancipation.

**Kaivalya-mukti** : Liberation.

**Kala** (1): Time measure, as in the time required to recite a mantra. It also sometimes means levels of
creation or manifested beings.

**Kala** (2): Time; death; fate; black; Yama.

**Kali** : “The Black One;” the black-skinned goddess who emerged from the body of Goddess Durga to
defeat the demons that were attacking her. She wears a garland of skulls (or severed heads) around her
neck and a skirt of severed arms–both symbolizing the sense of egotism. In one hand she wields the
sword of spiritual wisdom (prajna) and in the other carries a severed head (ego). Despite her fearsome
appearance, her two other hands are held in the gestures (mudras) that indicate: “Fear not” and “Draw
near.”

**Kali Yuga** : The Iron Age. See Yuga.

**Kalki** : The future–tenth–incarnation (avatar) of Vishnu.

**Kalpa** : A Day of Brahma–4,320,000,000 years. It alternates with a Night of Brahma of the same
length. In the Day of Brahma creation is manifest and in the Night of Brahma is it resolved into its
causal state.

**Kalpana** : Imagination of the mind; the association of name and permanence to objects; presumptive
knowledge; assumption; creation.

**Kalpataru** : “The wish-fulfilling tree.” The celestial tree of Hindu mythology, which grants all that a
person standing or sitting under it desires.

**Kalpita** : Imaginary; created (artificial, unreal); dreamt.

**Kalpita bheda** : Imaginary difference.

**Kalyana** : Excellence; auspicious; blessed.

**Kama** : Desire; passion; lust. Its intensity may range from tepid to raging intensity.

**Kamadeva** : God of beauty and love; the Vedic Cupid who shoots a bow with flowers instead of
arrows.

**Kamadhenu** : Wish-fulfilling cow produced at the churning of the milk ocean.

**Kamadhuk** : See Kamadhenu.


**Kamala** : Lotus; rose colored.

**Kamandalu** : A water vessel carried by a travelling sannyasi; usually made of a gourd or coconut shell,
it may also be earthenware. The kamandalu and staff (danda) are considered the insignia of the
sannyasi along with gerua clothing.

**Kanda** : Section; part; chapter.

**Kandarpa** : See Kamadeva.

**Kapila** : The great sage who formulated the Sankhya philosophy which is endorsed by Krishna in the
Bhagavad Gita. (See the entry under Sankhya.)

**Karana** : “Instrument;” cause; instrumental cause; reason. The means of knowledge and action. The
inner and outer instruments (sense organs). The unmanifested potential cause that, in due time, takes
shape as the visible effect; the material cause of the universe in such a state during the period of
dissolution, i.e., cosmic energy in a potential condition.

**Karana sharira** : The causal body (where the individual rests during sound, deep, dreamless sleep, the
intellect, mind and senses being reduced to an unmanifested potential condition), also known as the
anandamaya kosha, the “sheath of bliss.”

**Karatalabhiksha** : Using hands (palms) as the begging bowl.

**Karika** : Commentary; treatise.

**Karma** : Karma, derived from the Sanskrit root kri, which means to act, do, or make, means any kind of
action, including thought and feeling. It also means the effects of action. Karma is both action and
reaction, the metaphysical equivalent of the principle: “For every action there is an equal and opposite
reaction.” “Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap” (Galatians 6:7). It is karma operating
through the law of cause and effect that binds the jiva or the individual soul to the wheel of birth and
death. There are three kinds of karma: 1) sanchita karma, which is all the accumulated actions of all
previous births. 2) Prarabdha karma, the particular portion of such karma allowed for being worked out
in the present life. 3) Agami karma, the current karma being freshly performed by the individual.

**Karma Yoga** : The Yoga of selfless action; performance of one’s own duty; service of humanity.

**Karma Yogi** : One who practices karma yoga.

**Karma-bandhanam** : Karmic bondage; karmic tie.

**Karma-kanda** : The ritual portion of the Veda. The philosophy that Vedic ritual is the only path to
perfection.

**Karma-kandi** : One who follows the Karma-kanda as philosophy and practice.

**Karmaphala** : The fruit of actions; the consequence of a deed.

**Karma Marga** : The path of selfless knowledge leading to union with God.

**Karmashaya** : Latent impression of action which will eventually fructify.

**Karmendriya** : The five organs of action: voice, hand, foot, organ of excretion, and the organ of
generation.


**Karttikeya** : See Subramanya.

**Karuna** : Mercy; compassion; kindness.

**Kaupina** : A small strip of cloth used to cover one’s private parts. Also called a langoti.

**Khechari Mudra** : “Sky-walking” mudra. The turning up of the eyes in meditation. In Hatha Yoga, the
insertion of the tongue upward and behind the palate, blocking the nasal passages.

**Kedarnath (Kedar Nath)** : One of the chief places of pilgrimage in India: a temple on a mountaintop
in the Himalayas, dedicated to the worship of Shiva in the form of a linga installed there by Adi
Shankaracharya.

**Keshava** : Beautiful-haired one–a title of Krishna.

**Kevala** : Oneness; absolute; alone; single; independent; perfect; uncompounded.

**Kevala-advaita** : Absolute Non-dualism culminating in liberation.

**Kevala Advaitin** : A nondualist intent on the attainment of the state of Kaivalya–liberation.

**Khol** : See Mridangam.

**Kirtan** : Singing the names and praises of God; devotional chanting.

**Klesha** : Literally, taints or afflictions. The kleshas are: ignorance, egotism, attractions and repulsions
towards objects, and desperate clinging to physical life from the fear of death. (See Yoga Sutras 2:2-9.)

**Klishta** : Afflicted.

**Kosha** : Sheath; bag; scabbard; a sheath enclosing the soul; body. There are five such concentric sheaths
or bodies: the sheaths of bliss, intellect, mind, life-force and the physical body–the anandamaya,
jnanamaya, manomaya, pranamaya and annamaya bodies respectively.

**Kripa** : Grace; mercy; compassion; blessing. There are three kinds of kripa: 1) sadhana kripa, the grace
of self-effort; 2) guru kripa, the grace of a teacher, and 3) divya kripa, divine grace.

**Krishna** (1): Black; dark-colored.

**Krishna** (2): “The dark blue one.” A Divine Incarnation born in India about three thousand years ago,
Whose teachings to His disciple Arjuna on the eve of the Great India (Mahabharata) War comprise the
Bhagavad Gita.

**Krishna Dwaipayana** : “The island-born dark one.” Vyasa.

**Krita Yuga** : Satya Yuga, the Golden Age. See Yuga.

**Kriya** : Purificatory action, practice, exercise, or rite; movement; function; skill. Kriyas purify the body
and nervous system as well as the subtle bodies to enable the yogi to reach and hold on to higher levels
of consciousness and being.

**Kriya Shakti** : Power or faculty of action (kriya.)

**Kriya Yoga** : The Yoga of Purification: “Austerity (tapasya), self-study (swadhyaya), and offering of


the life to God (Ishwara pranidhaha) are Kriya Yoga.” (Yoga Sutras 2:1)

**Krodha** : Anger, wrath; fury.

**Kshama** : Forgiveness; patience, forbearance.

**Kshatriya** : A member of the ruler/warrior caste.

**Kshetra** : Field; property; place of pilgrimage; sacred place; the physical body.

**Kshetrajna** : Knower of the field; the individual Self (Atman); the Supreme Self (Paramatman). See the
thirteenth chapter of the Bhagavad Gita.

**Kshobha** : Shaking; agitated; disturbed; emotion.

**Kubera** : The god of wealth.

**Kumaras (Four)** : Those highly advanced souls–Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanatkumara and Sanatsujata–
who at the beginning of this creation cycle refused to engage in worldly life despite the command of
Brahma. They were then taught by Lord Shiva, in the form of Dakshinamurti, the mysteries of
Brahmajnana.

**Kumari** : Virgin; a formal title of address for an unmarried woman.

**Kumari Puja** : The worship of a virgin (usually a prepubescent girl) as an embodiment of the Divine
Mother.

**Kumbha** : Pot; water vessel.

**Kumbhaka** : Retention of breath; suspension of breath.

**Kumkum** : “Red-red.” Red-colored powder used for making a ritual mark between the eyebrows.

**Kund** : A pond; a small natural bathing place.

**Kundalini** : The primordial cosmic energy located in the individual; it is usually thought of as lying
coiled up like a serpent at the base of the spine.

**Kurukshetra** : The battlefield in Northern India where the Mahabharata (Great Indian) War took place,
and where the Bhagavad Gita was spoken.

**Kusha** : One of the varieties of sacred grass (darbha) used in many religious rites. Because of its
insulating qualities, both physical and metaphysical, it is recommended as a seat (asana) for meditation,
and as mats for sleeping (it keeps the sleeper warm).

**Kutashtha** : Changeless; immutable; dweller in the height (summit); a name of Brahman.

**Kutira** : Hut; cottage; house; building; hermitage.

# L

```
rule
```
**Lahiri Mahasaya** : One of the greatest yogis of nineteenth-century India, written about extensively in
Autobiography of a Yogi by Paramhansa Yogananda.


**Lakh** : One hundred thousand.

**Lakshana** : Definition; characteristic; condition; attribute; sign; mark.

**Lakshmi** : The consort of Vishnu; the goddess of wealth and prosperity; good fortune; auspiciousness;
abundance.

**Lakshya** : Perceivable object; object of concentration-attention; vision.

**Langoti** : See kaupina.

**Laya** : Dissolution; merging.

**Laya Yoga** : Process of absorption of the individual soul into the Supreme Soul; concentration of the
mind with a view to dissolve it; that kind of yogic meditation where the mind is carried on
progressively from grosser to subtler ideas until it is dissolved in the Unmanifested or Para Brahman;
the yoga sometimes known as Omkaralayacintana–the merging of the consciousness into Om.

**Lila** : Play; sport; divine play; the cosmic play. The concept that creation is a play of the divine, existing
for no other reason than for the mere joy of it. The life of an avatar is often spoken of as lila.

**Linga** : Mark; characteristic; gender; sign; symbol; distinctive sign through which it is possible to
recognize the nature of something. Usually a reference to a column-like or egg-shaped symbol of
Shiva.

**Linga sharira** : Subtle body; astral body (also called sukshma-sharira).

**Lobha** : Greed; covetousness.

**Loka** : World or realm; sphere, level, or plane of existence, whether physical, astral, or causal. There are
seven lokas: Bhuloka: The material plane of atomic matter. Bhuvaloka: The lesser astral world, similar
to the material plane (Bhuloka). Swa(r)loka: The median astral world. Mahaloka: The higher astral
world. Those who attain this world need never be reborn in the three lower worlds of Bhur, Bhuvah,
and Swah. Janaloka: The world that embraces both the highest astral levels and the lower causal levels.
Tapoloka: The median causal world exclusively inhabited by advanced spirits who perpetually engage
in meditation–tapasya. Satyaloka: The highest causal world inhabited by those who have attained
liberation (moksha).

**Lokaishana** : Desire for fame.

**Lokasangraha** : Solidarity of the world; uplift of the world.

**Lota** : A metal water vessel used for drinking, carrying, or pouring water.

# M

```
rule
```
**Mada** : Pride; conceit; intoxication; exhilaration; dementia.

**Madhava** : Descendant of Madhu (a Yadava or Madhava patriarch). A title of Krishna.

**Madhura** : Sweet; honeylike.

**Madhura bhava** : The devotional relationship of love toward God; looking upon God as the Beloved.


**Madhusudana** : Destroyer of the Demon Madhu (properly an epithet of Vishnu)–a title of Krishna.

**Madhvacharya** : The founder and exponent of Dvaita (Dualistic) Vedanta (1199-1278), who taught
devotion to Vishnu.

**Madhya** : Center; middle; central.

**Maha** : Great; mighty; powerful; lofty; noble. Usually a prefix or suffix.

**Mahabharata** : The world’s longest epic poem (110,00 verses) about the Mahabharata (Great Indian)
War that took place about three thousand years ago. The Mahabharata also includes the Bhagavad Gita,
the most popular sacred text of Hinduism.

**Mahabhuta** : Great elements; primordial elements. The five great elements: ether (akasha), air (vayu),
fire (tejas), water (ap), and earth (prithvi).

**Mahadeva** : “The Great God;” a title of Shiva.

**Mahaloka** : The higher astral world. Those who attain this world need never be reborn in the three
lower worlds of Bhur, Bhuvah, and Swah.

**Mahamantra** : “The Great Mantra,” popularly known in the United States and Europe as “the Hare
Krishna Mantra”–Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama, Rama, Hare, Hare; Hare Krishna, Hare Krishna,
Krishna, Krishna, Hare, Hare.

**Mahamaya** : “Great illusion;” divine Power operating as identified with the Supreme Lord. A title of
Shakti, the Goddess.

**Mahamrityunjaya** : “The Great Conqueror of Death.” A title and four-armed form of Shiva.

**Mahamrityunjaya mantra** : “The Great Conqueror of Death Mantra.” A Vedic verse addressed to
Shiva that is recited for protection, recovery from disease, and extension of life.

**Mahan** : The Great One; The Supreme One; title of the Supreme Being. That One which is impossible
to adequately praise. That alone which is truly Great.

**Mahapralaya** : The final cosmic dissolution; the dissolution of all the worlds of relativity (Bhuloka,
Bhuvaloka, Swaloka, Mahaloka, Janaloka, Tapoloka, and Satyaloka), until nothing but the Absolute
remains. There are lesser dissolutions, known simply as pralayas, when only the first five worlds
(lokas) are dissolved.

**Maharatha** : “A great-car-warrior,” a commander of eleven thousand bowmen as he rode in his chariot.

**Mahar(i)shi** : Great sage (rishi).

**Mahapurusha** : A great person; a great soul; a sage; the Supreme Lord.

**Mahasamadhi** : Literally “the great union [samadhi],” this refers to a realized yogi’s conscious
departure from the physical body at death.

**Mahashakti** : The Great Power; the divine creative energy.

**Mahashivaratri** : “The Great Night of Shiva.” The major, night-long festival of the worship of Shiva
that occurs on the fourteenth day of the dark half of the lunar month known as Phalguna (usually in


February, but every third year when an extra month is added to the lunar calendar, it may occur in
March).

**Mahashunya(ta)** : The Great Void; the Great Emptiness. The state of the Formless Absolute, which is
empty in the sense that it is without manifest creation. It is not a state of nonexistence, because it has
the nature of Being, Consciousness, and Bliss (Satchidananda).

**Mahat** : See Mahat Tattwa.

**Mahat Tattwa** : The Great Principle; the first evolute from Prakriti; intellect. The principle of Cosmic
Intelligence or Buddhi; universal Christ Consciousness, the “Son of God,” the “Only Begotten of the
Father,” “the firstborn of every creature.”

**Mahatma** : Literally: “a great soul [atma].” Usually a designation for a sannyasi or a saint.

**Mahavakya** : Literally: “Great Saying.” The highest Vedantic truth, found in the Upanishads, there are
four Mahavakyas: 1) Prajñanam Brahma–“Consciousness is Brahman” (Aitareya Upanishad); 2) Ayam
Atma Brahma–“This Self is Brahman” (Mandukya Upanishad); 3) Tat Twam Asi–“Thou art That”
(Chandogya Upanishad); 4) Aham Brahmasmi–“I am Brahman” (Brihadaranyaka Upanishad).

**Mahavrata** : The Great Vow/Rule of Conduct. The Yoga Sutras (2:31) of Patanjali state that ahimsa,
satya, asteya, brahmacharya, and aparigraha “not conditioned by class, place, time or occasion, and
extending to all stages, constitute the Great Vow.” (See separate entries for each component.)

**Maheshwara** : The Great Ishwara; Shiva.

**Mahima** : Glory; greatness; magnitude; miracle; magnification (in the sense of glorification or praise).

**Mahout** : Trainer-handler of an elephant.

**Maithuna(m)** : Sexual intercourse.

**Maitri** : Friendliness; friendship; love.

**Mala (1)** : Taint; impurity; defilement; defect; ignorance, limitation of consciousness.

**Mala (2)** : Garland; flower garland; rosary; chain. A string of beads (usually 108) used to count off
repetitions of a mantra or a yogic process.

**Malina** : Impure; defective.

**Manah** : The sensory mind; the perceiving faculty that receives the messages of the senses.

**Manana** : Thinking, pondering, reflecting, considering.

**Manas(a)** : See Manah.

**Manasika** : Pertaining to the mind; mental; mental action.

**Mandala** : Circle; magical circle or diagram; the special domain of a deity; a section of the Rig Veda;
an association.

**Mandapa(m)** : An open, covered hall or pavilion consisting of a roof and supports (usually pillars, but
it can be walls with very large openings); a tent.


**Mandir(a)** : Temple; abode.

**Mangala** : Auspicious.

**Mangalarati** : See Arati.

**Mani** : Jewel.

**Manipura chakra** : Energy center located in the spine at the point opposite the navel. Seat of the Fire
element.

**Manohara** : “Enchanter/Ravisher/Stealer of the Mind;” one who captivates one’s mind. A title of
Vishnu, but usually applied to Krishna as the flute player.

**Manolaya** : Involution and dissolution of the mind into its cause.

**Manomaya kosha** : “The sheath of the mind (manas–mental substance).” The level (kosha) of the
sensory mind. The astral body.

**Manonasa** : Destruction of the mind.

**Manonirodha** : Control or annihilation of the mind.

**Mantra(m)** : Sacred syllable or word or set of words through the repetition and reflection of which one
attains perfection or realization of the Self. Literally, “a transforming thought” (manat trayate). A
mantra, then is a sound formula that transforms the consciousness.

**Mantra Yoga** : The Yoga of the Divine Word; the science of sound; the path to divine union through
repetition of a mantra.

**Mantric** : Having to do with mantra(s)–their sound or their power.

**Manu** : The ancient lawgiver, whose code, The Laws of Manu (Manu Smriti) is the foundation of
Hindu religious and social conduct.

**Manus** : Progenitors of the human race who were also its lawgivers and teachers.

**Manushya** : Human being.

**Manvantara** : An age of the rulership of a Manu. Within a cosmic age (kalpa) there are fourteen
manvantaras.

**Mara** : The embodiment of the power of cosmic evil, illusion, and delusion.

**Marga** : Way; path; street; approach to God-realization (bhakti marga, jnana marga, karma marga, yoga
marga, etc.).

**Margashirsha** : A lunar month, roughly the latter half of November and the first half of December. This
is the time of ideal weather in India.

**Marichi** : The chief of the Maruts.

**Maruts** : The presiding deities of winds and storms.

**Mata** : Mother.


**Math(a)** : A monastery.

**Matra** : Letters of the alphabet or their sounds.

**Mauna(m)** : Silence–not speaking.

**Maya** : The illusive power of Brahman; the veiling and the projecting power of the universe, the power
of Cosmic Illusion.

**Mayic** : Having to do with Maya.

**Medha** : Power of retaining the import of studies; intelligence or intellect; power of understanding.

**Mela** : Fair; large religious gathering.

**Meru** : The mountain, of supreme height, on which the gods dwell, or the mountain on which Shiva is
ever seated in meditation. Said to be the center of the world, supporting heaven itself. Obviously a
yogic symbol. The central bead on a japa mala.

**Mimamsa** : An enquiry into the nature of a thing; the science of philosophical logic enquiring into
Vedic knowledge. Usually a reference to Purva-Mimamsa, one of the six schools of orthodox Indian
philosophy. It focuses on the Vedas and the Vedic rites to establish their supreme spiritual value and
authority.

**Mimamsaka** : A follower of the Purva Mimamsa school of philosophy.

**Mitahara** : Moderate diet.

**Mithya** : Not real; neither real nor unreal; illusory; false; untrue; incorrect.

**Mitra** : Friend; companion; associate. The Vedic god of harmony.

**Mleccha** : Foreigner; an alien; barbarian; someone who does not belong to Hindu culture.

**Moha** : Delusion–in relation to something, usually producing delusive attachment, infatuation, or
obsession based on a completely false perception and evaluation of the object.

**Moksha** : Release; liberation; the term is particularly applied to the liberation from the bondage of
karma and the wheel of birth and death; Absolute Experience.

**Mridanga(m)** : A drum used exclusively in devotional music, also known as a khol.

**Mrityu** : Death; Lord Yama.

**Mudita** : Joy; happiness.

**Mudra** : Gesture; hand position; seal; stamp.

**Muhurta** : A unit of time–a thirtieth part of a day, forty-five to forty-eight minutes in length.

**Mukta** : Liberated; freed; one who is liberated from bondage.

**Muktajiva** : A liberated individual spirit.

**Mukti** : Moksha; liberation; release.


**Mula** : Origin(al); primary; root; base.

**Muladhara chakra** : “Seat of the root.” Energy center located at the base of the spine. Seat of the Earth
element.

**Mulaprakriti** : The Root [Basic] Energy from which all things are formed. The Divine Prakriti or
Energy of God.

**Mumukshu** : A seeker after liberation (moksha).

**Mumukshutwa** : Intense desire or yearning for liberation (moksha).

**Muni** : “Silent one” ( one observing the vow of silence (mauna); sage; ascetic.

**Murti** : Image; statue; idol; figure; embodiment.

# N

```
rule
```
**Nada** : Sound; the resonance of sound; mystic inner sound; the primal sound or first vibration from
which all creation has emanated; the first manifestation of the unmanifested Absolute; Omkara or
Shabda Brahman. The inner sound of Om experienced in meditation.

**Nadi** : A channel in the subtle (astral) body through which subtle prana (psychic energy) flows; a
physical nerve.

**Naga** : Snake; a kind of astral being; naked.

**Nagar(a)** : City; town.

**Nagar(san)kirtan** : Kirtan done in procession through the streets or sometimes within or around an
ashram or other property.

**Nagas** : Astral beings that often interact with human beings, usually taking the form of snakes. (In
Sanskrit naga is the word for snake.)

**Nahabat** : A temple music tower. Musicians sit on the upper story and play during festivals and
sometimes at the time of daily worship. Holy Mother Sarada Devi lived in the northern nahabat of the
Dakshineshwar Kali Temple.

**Naishthika brahmachari(n)** : One irrevocably vowed to life-long celibacy; a permanent brahmachari.

**Naivedya** : Food offered in worship.

**Nakshatra** : Star; heavenly body; asterism or constellation.

**Nama** : Name. The Divine Name.

**Nama-rupa** : Name and form.

**Namaskara** : “I bow to you;” a respectful greeting; salutation; obeisance.

**Namasmarana** : Remembrance (repetition) of the Name of God. Remembrance of the Lord through
repetition of His name.


**Namaste(bhyam)** : “I bow to you.” “I salute you.”

**Nanak (Guru)** : Founder of the Sikh religion in the fifteenth century.

**Nara** : Man; human.

**Narada** : A primeval sage to whom some of the verses of the Rig Veda are attributed.

**Naraka** : Hell.

**Naraki** : One who is in hell.

**Narayana** : A proper name of God–specifically of Vishnu. The term by etymology means a Being that
supports all things, that is reached by them and that helps them to do so; also one who pervades all
things. He Who dwells in man. Literally: “God in humanity.” Sadhus often address one another as
Narayana and greet one another: “Namo Narayanaya”–I salute Narayana [in you].

**Narayana shila** : See Shalagrama.

**Nasika** : Nose.

**Nasikagra** : Tip of the nose.

**Nasikagradrishti** : Gaze directed toward the tip of the nose.

**Nastika** : Unbeliever; atheist.

**Nataraja** : “King of the Dance,” a title of Shiva the Cosmic Dancer. The whole creation is the dance of
Shiva. He holds a drum (damaru) in his upper right hand representing the sound (shabda) of Om by
which the universe is created. In his upper left hand he holds a flame which symbolizes the dissolution
of the universe in fire–but which also represents the tapasya by which the yogi dissolves the bonds of
this world. His lower hand is in abhaya mudra, the gesture meaning “fear not,” bestowing peace and
protection. His lower left hand points toward his upraised foot indicating that the “feet” of the yogi
must be lifted up toward Spirit. It also symbolizes liberation.

**Natha** : Lord; ruler; protector.

**Navadhvara kuti** : The nine-gated house–the body.

**Navadhvara puri** : The nine-gated city–the body.

**Neem Karoli Baba** : One of India’s most amazing and mysterious spiritual figures. The life of this great
miracle-worker and master spanned from two to four centuries (at the least), including most of the
twentieth century.

**Neti-neti** : “Not this; not this.” The analytical process of progressively negating all names and forms in
order to arrive at the eternal underlying Truth. In the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad both Brahman and the
Self are described as “not this; not this,” meaning that when we negate every name, form, or quality,
Being Itself will remain.

**Nididhyasana** : Meditation; contemplation; profound and continuous meditation. It is a continuous,
unbroken stream of ideas of the same kind as those of the Absolute. It removes the contrariwise
tendencies of the mind.


**Nidra** : Sleep; either dreaming or deep sleep state.

**Nijananda** : The bliss beyond sense perception.

**Nimitta** : Cause; instrument; effect; sign; substance.

**Nirakara** : Without form.

**Niranjana** : Without blemish; spotless; flawless.

**Nirguna** : Without attributes or qualities (gunas).

**Nirguna Brahman** : The impersonal, attributeless Absolute beyond all description or designation.

**Nirodha** : Restraint; suppression; non-reaction; non-response; dissolving.

**Nirmala** : Without impurity; pure; without defect or blemish.

**Nirvana** : Liberation; final emancipation; the term is particularly applied to the liberation from the
bondage of karma and the wheel of birth and death that comes from knowing Brahman; Absolute
Experience. See Moksha.

**Nirvedam** : Indifference; non-reaction; non-susceptibility; the state of being unmoved or not influenced
by something.

**Nirvikalpa** : Indeterminate; non-conceptual; without the modifications of the mind; beyond all duality.

**Nirvikalpa Samadhi** : Samadhi in which there is no objective experience or experience of “qualities”
whatsoever, and in which the triad of knower, knowledge and known does not exist; purely subjective
experience of the formless and qualitiless and unconditioned Absolute. The highest state of samadhi,
beyond all thought, attribute, and description.

**Nirvikara** : Without transformation, modifications, or change; changeless.

**Nishkama karma** : Desireless action; disinterested action; action dedicated to God without personal
desire for the fruits of the action; selfless action.

**Nitya** : Eternal; permanent; unchanging; the ultimate Reality; the eternal Absolute. Secondarily: daily or
obligatory (nitya karma–that which must be done every day).

**Nitya-Shuddha** : Eternally pure.

**Nityananda (Avadhuta Paramhansa)** : A great Master of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, and
the most renowned Pranava yogi of our times. His Chidakasha Gita contains some of the most
profound statements on the Pranava and Its application by the yogi.

**Nivritti** : Negation; the path of turning away from activity; withdrawal. Literally, “to turn back.” The
path of renunciation.

**Nivritti Marga** : The path of renunciation, of withdrawal from the world.

**Niyama** : Observance; the five Do’s of Yoga: 1) shaucha–purity, cleanliness; 2) santosha–contentment,
peacefulness; 3) tapas–austerity, practical (i.e., result-producing) spiritual discipline; 4) swadhyaya–
self-study, spiritual study; 5) Ishwarapranidhana–offering of one’s life to God.


# O

```
rule
```
**Ojah** : See Ojas.

**Ojas** : Vitality; vigor; luster; splendor; energy; spiritual energy. The highest form of energy in the
human body. In the spiritual aspirant who constantly practices continence and purity, other forms of
energy are transmuted into ojas and stored in the brain, manifesting as spiritual and intellectual power.

**Om** : The Pranava or the sacred syllable symbolizing and embodying Brahman.

**Omkara** : Om.

**Oshadhi** : Medicinal plant.

# P

```
rule
```
**Pada (1)** : Part; chapter; one-fourth portion.

**Pada (2)** : Foot.

**Padma** : Lotus.

**Padmasana** : Lotus posture; considered the best posture for meditation.

**Paduka** : Sandals.

**Panchabhuta** : The Five Elements: ether, air, fire, water, and earth.

**Panchagni** : “Five fires.” A discipline in which four fires are kindled in the four cardinal directions and
meditation is done from dawn till dusk seated in their midst, the sun being the fifth “fire.” Also called
Panchatapa.

**Panchanga** : Traditional Indian calendar.

**Panchatapa** : See Panchagni.

**Pandal** : A flat-roofed tent whose sides and top are detached from one another, the root usually being
higher than the sides to provide air circulation.

**Pandavas** : The five sons of King Pandu: Yudhishthira, Bhima, Arjuna, Nakula, and Sahadeva. Their
lives are described in the Mahabharata.

**Pandita** : Scholar; pundit; learned individual.

**Papa** : Sin; demerit; evil; sinful deeds; evil deeds.

**Para** : Higher; supreme; universal; beyond; transcendent.

**Parabhakti** : Supreme devotion to God. This leads to jnana.

**Parabrahman** : Supreme Brahman.

**Parama** : Highest; supreme.


**Param[a]guru** : The guru’s guru.

**Param[a]purusha** : See Purusha.

**Paramartha** : The highest attainment, purpose, or goal; absolute truth; Reality.

**Paramatma(n)** : The Supreme Self, God.

**Parameshwara** : The Supreme Lord.

**Paramhansa** : Literally: Supreme Swan, a person of the highest spiritual realization, from the fact that
a swan can separate milk from water and is therefore an apt symbol for one who has discarded the
unreal for the Real, the darkness for the Light, and mortality for the Immortal, having separated himself
fully from all that is not God and joined himself totally to the Divine, becoming a veritable
embodiment of Divinity manifested in humanity.

**Parampara** : Tradition; one following another; lineage; succession; uninterrupted succession.

**Parampurusha** : The Supreme Spirit; Supreme Person.

**Paranirvana** : The Supreme, Final Nirvana, when the perfectly enlightened individual is released from
physical embodiment, never to return to birth in any world, high or low.

**Para-shakti** : Supreme Power.

**Parikrama** : Circumambulation; “to traverse around.” It is the custom in India to circumambulate
sacred objects and places, always moving clockwise so the sacred thing or place is to the right of the
devotee.

**Paripurna** : All-full; self-contained.

**Parivrajaka** : “One who wanders;” a roaming ascetic; one who has renounced the world; a sannyasin.

**Parvati** : “Daughter of the Mountain;” the daughter of King Himalaya; the consort of Shiva; an
incarnation of the Divine Mother.

**Patala** : Hell; nether world.

**Patanjali** : A yogi of ancient India, the author of the Yoga Sutras.

**Pati** : “Lord;” God; Master; Shiva.

**Pativrata dharma** : The rules of life of a chaste woman devoted to her husband.

**Paurusha** : Manhood, manliness, virility, potency, courage, effort.

**Pauresheya** : Personal; pertaining to or what originates from a person (purusha).

**Pavaka** : Agni.

**Pavitra** : Holy; pure; purified; can also mean purifier or sanctifier.

**Payasa** : A sweet rice pudding made from rice, milk, ghee, sugar, and spices.

**Phala** : Fruit; result or effect.


**Pinda** : Part of the whole; individual; small ball of rice offered to one’s ancestors as an oblation.
Sometimes in the sannyas ritual the prospective sannyasi performs his own funeral obsequies (shraddha
ceremony), including making offerings of rice balls to/for himself.

**Pingala** : The subtle channel that extends from the base of the spine to the medulla on the right side of
the spine.

**Pishacha** : Vampire; flesh-or-blood-craving demon.

**Pitamaha** : Grandfather; Great Father; titles of Brahma, the Creator.

**Pitha** : Seat; throne; chair. It also indicates a place where something is centered or established. For
example, a place of power may be referred to as a “shakti pitha” or a place favorable to meditation as a
“yoga pitha.” A shrine to a deity may also be called a pitha, such as “Sarada pitha,” etc., meaning that
the deity resides or is established there.

**Pitri** : A departed ancestor, a forefather.

**Prabhu** : Lord; excelling; mighty; powerful; master. From the root bhu–“to become, hence to rule”–and
pra–“forth.”

**Prarabdha karma** : “Ripened” actions (pra=before; rabh=begin); the portion of accumulated karma,
the fruits of which determines one’s present life, which are being experienced now and which cannot be
erased; karma in action; remainder; karma that is working itself out during the present life. That part of
the accumulated effect of past deeds which has begun to take effect with the creation of the present
physical body and which is responsible for the continuance of the body even after release is attained. It
is destroyed only when its force is spent. It cannot be averted, avoided, or changed–though either by
knowledge or by grace its impact can be minimized or rendered nil to the perceiver.

**Pradakshina** : Circumambulation of a sacred object or place, walking around it clockwise so it is
always on your right side.

**Pradhana** : Prakriti; causal matter.

**Prahlada** : A daitya prince who rejected his daitya heritage and became a devotee of Vishnu. His father,
the evil Hiranyakashipu, tortured him and attempted his life because of his devotion and his speaking to
others of divine matters, yet he remained steadfast.

**Prajapati** : Progenitor; the Creator; a title of Brahma the Creator.

**Prajna** : Consciousness; awareness.

**Prajñanam Brahma** : “Consciousness is Brahman.” The Mahavakya (Great Saying) of the Aitareya
Upanishad.

**Prajapati** : Progenitor; the Creator; a title of Brahma the Creator.

**Prakasha** : Shining; luminous; effulgence; illumination; pure consciousness.

**Prakriti** : Causal matter; the fundamental power (shakti) of God from which the entire cosmos is
formed; the root base of all elements; undifferentiated matter; the material cause of the world. Also
known as Pradhana.


**Prakritilaya** : Absorbed or merged in Prakriti; the state of yogis who have so identified with the cosmic
energy that they are trapped in it as though in a net and cannot separate themselves from it and evolve
onwards until the cosmic dissolution (pralaya) occurs in which the lower worlds of men, angels, and
archangels (bhur, bhuwah and swar lokas) are dissolved.

**Pralaya** : Dissolution. See Mahapralaya.

**Prama** : Valid knowledge; true knowledge; knowledge of the real; knowledge free from error and above
doubt.

**Pramana** : Means of valid knowledge logical proof; authority (of knowledge) means of cognition.

**Pramanya(m)** : Truth; validity; proof.

**Prameya** : Object of cognition; object of (right) knowledge; object of proof; subject of inquiry.

**Prana** : Vital energy; life-breath; life-force. In the human body the prana is divided into five forms: 1)
Prana, the prana that moves upward; 2) Apana: The prana that moves downward, producing the
excretory functions in general. 3) Vyana: The prana that holds prana and apana together and produces
circulation in the body. 4) Samana: The prana that carries the grosser material of food to the apana and
brings the subtler material to each limb; the general force of digestion. 5) Udana: The prana which
brings up or carries down what has been drunk or eaten; the general force of assimilation.

**Pranam** : “To bow;” to greet with respect. A respectful or reverential gesture made by putting the hands
together palm-to-palm in front of the chest. A prostration before a deity or revered person.

**Pranamaya kosha** : “The sheath of vital air (prana).” The sheath consisting of vital forces and the
(psychic) nervous system.

**Pranapratishta** : “Installation of life;” a ritual which is done to an image when it is set on the altar of a
temple at its consecration. This ritual makes the image alive in a subtle–but no less real–sense.

**Pranava** : A title of Om, meaning “Life-ness” or “Life-Giver.” Om is the expression or controller of
prana–the life force within the individual being and the cosmos.

**Pranayama** : Control of the subtle life forces, often by means of special modes of breathing. Therefore
breath control or breathing exercises are usually mistaken for pranayama.

**Prapancha** : The world; appearance of the world.

**Prarabdha** : Karma that has become activated and begun to manifest and bear fruit; karmic “seeds”
that have begun to “sprout.”

**Prasada(m)** : Food or any gift that has been first offered in worship or to a saint; that which is given by
a saint; literally: “grace.”

**Pratima** : Image; symbol; reflection; idol; figure; creator.

**Pratipaksha bhavana** : The method of substituting the opposite through imagination; thus, fear is
overcome by dwelling strongly upon its opposite, viz., courage. Reflecting on and cultivating those
traits which are opposed to spiritual obstructions.

**Pratyagatman** : The Self whose existence is understood only by turning one’s vision inward; the


indwelling Self; kutashtha; Brahman.

**Pratyahara** : Abstraction or withdrawal of the senses from their objects, the fifth limb of Patanjali’s
Ashtanga Yoga.

**Pratyaksha** : Perception; direct perception; intuition.

**Pravrajin** : A wandering sannyasi.

**Pravritti** : Action; endeavor. Literally: “to turn forth.”

**Pravritti Marga** : The path of active involvement in the world.

**Prayag** : Rudraprayag, the modern-day Allahabad, site of the Triveni–the confluence of the three sacred
rivers: Ganges, Jumna (Yamuna), and Saraswati.

**Prayaschitta** : Atonement (through various prescribed acts); expiation; mortification.

**Prayatna** : Effort; attempt; conscious activity.

**Prema** : Love, both human and divine; in the latter sense an ecstatic experience, interior disposition or
movement which brings the lover into oneness with the Beloved.

**Premeshananda, Swami** : Affectionately known as “Premesh Maharaj,” Swami Premeshananda was a
disciple of Sri Sri Ma Sarada Devi, the wife of Sri Ramakrishna Paramhansa, and a renowned monk of
the Ramakrishna Order.

**Preta** : Ghost; spirit of the dead.

**Preyo marga** : The path of the pleasing, the pleasant, the pleasurable, or of worldly gain, as opposed to
the path of the good or truly beneficial.

**Prithvi** : The planet earth; the earth element, from which the sense of smell (gandha) arises

**Priya(m)** : Dear; beloved; pleasing.

**Puja** : Worship; ceremonial (ritual) worship; adoration; honor. Usually involving the image of a deity.

**Pujari** : One who performs ritualistic worship (puja).

**Punarjanma** : “Birth again;” rebirth/reincarnation.

**Pundit** : Scholar; pandita; learned individual.

**Punya** : Merit; virtue; meritorious acts; virtuous deeds.

**Puraka** : Inhalation.

**Purana** : Literally “The Ancient.” The Puranas are a number of scriptures attributed to the sage Vyasa
that teach spiritual principles and practices through stories about sacred historical personages which
often include their teachings given in conversations.

**Purana Purusha** : The Ancient Person; God.

**Purascharana** : An observance consisting of the repetition of a mantra–as many hundred thousand


times as there are syllables (letters) in it. This is done with rigid rules regarding diet, number of japa to
be done per day, seat, etc.

**Purna** : Full; complete.

**Purnima** : Full moon day.

**Purohita** : Priest; class of Vedic priests.

**Purusha** : “Person” in the sense of a conscious spirit. Both God and the individual spirits are purushas,
but God is the Adi (Original, Archetypal) Purusha, Parama (Highest) Purusha, and the Purushottama
(Best of the Purushas).

**Purushartha** : The four goals of human life: wealth (artha), desire (kama), righteousness (dharma), and
liberation (moksha). The first is the economic value, the second is the psychological value, the third is
the moral value, and the fourth is the spiritual value. Human effort; individual exertion; right exertion.

**Purushottama** : Best of the purushas; highest of the purushas; Supreme Purusha. The word “spirits”
may also be substituted for “purushas,” and in some instances “men” can be susbituted for “purushas.”

**Purva samskaras** : Previous samskaras; that is, samskaras brought over from previous lives.

**Purvashram** : Previous stage of life.

**Pusan** : Surya, the Sun-god.

**Pushpa** : Flower.

**Pushpanjali** : Flower offering.

**Putra** : Son.

**Putraishana** : Desire for progeny.

# R

```
rule
```
**Radha** : The most celebrated of the Gopis, the dearest to Sri Krishna.

**Raga** : Attachment/affinity for something, implying a desire for it. This can be emotional (instinctual)
or intellectual. It may range from simple liking or preference to intense desire and attraction. See
Dwesha.

**Raga-dwesha** : The continual cycle of desire/aversion, like/dislike.

**Raja** : King; royal.

**Raja Yoga** : See Ashtanga Yoga.

**Rajas** : Activity, passion, desire for an object or goal. One of the three gunas.

**Rajasic** : Possessed of the qualities of the raja guna (rajas). Passionate; active; restless.

**Rajoguna** : Activity, passion, desire for an object or goal.


**Raki** : A (usually) red string tied around the right wrist–usually by a priest in a temple or holy place–as
mantras are recited for blessing and protection.

**Rakshasa** : There are two kinds of rakshasas: 1) semidivine, benevolent beings, or 2) cannibal demons
or goblins, enemies of the gods. Meat-eating human beings are sometimes classed as rakshasas.

**Rama** : An incarnation of God–the king of ancient Ayodhya in north-central India. His life is recorded
in the ancient epic Ramayana.

**Rama Tirtha** : One the key spiritual figures in late nineteenth and early twentieth century India. A
former university professor of mathematics in the Punjab, Swami Rama Tirtha traveled throughout
India and even to Japan and America, preaching the truths of Advaita Vedanta and vigorously teaching
the practice of Om Yoga.

**Ramakrishna** : Sri Ramakrishna lived in India in the second half of the nineteenth century, and is
regarded by all India as a perfectly enlightened person–and by many as an Incarnation of God.

**Ramana Maharshi** : A great sage of the twentieth century who lived in Arunachala in South India. He
taught the path of Self-Inquiry (Atma Vichara) wherein the person simply turns his awareness within
asking “Who am I?” until the self (atma) is revealed.

**Ramanuja (Sri)** : The great Vaishnava teacher of the eleventh century who formulated the philosophy
known as Vishishtadvaita Vedanta (Qualified Non-Dualism).

**Ramayana** : The great Sanskrit epic poem by the sage Valmiki describing the life of Rama, the king of
ancient Ayodhya in north-central India, who is regarded as an incarnation of God. The renowned Hindi
devotional poem by the saint Tulsidas, also on the life of Rama.

**Ramdas (Swami)** : One of the best-known and most influential spiritual figures of twentieth-century
India, founder of Anandashram in South India and author of the spiritual classic In the Vision of God as
well as many other inspirational books.

**Ramnam** : “The Name of Rama.” Japa or kirtan of the Name, titles, or mantra(s) of Rama.

**Rasa** : Taste; essence; savor; juice; nectar of delight.

**Rati** : Pleasure.

**Ratna** : Jewel; pearl; gem; the best.

**Ratri** : Night.

**Rechaka** : Exhalation of breath.

**Retas** : Semen; virile seed

**Riddhi** : Highest experiential delight; nine varieties of extraordinary exaltation and grandeur that come
to a yogi as he advances and progresses in Yoga, like the supernatural powers or siddhis. Increase;
growth; prosperity; success; wealth.

**Rishabhadeva** : An ancient ascetic who wandered freely through the forests, possessing nothing–not
even wearing clothes–virtually unaware of his body.


**Rishi** : Sage; seer of the Truth.

**Rita(m)** : Truth; Law; Right; Order. The natural order of things, or Cosmic Order/Law. Its root is ri,
which means “to rise, to tend upward.” It is said to be the basis for the Law of Karma.

**Rudra** : Shiva. Derived from rud–he who drives away sin or suffering.

**Rudras** : Vedic deities of destruction for renewal, the chief of which is Shiva.

**Rudraksha** : “The Eye of Shiva;” a tree seed considered sacred to Shiva and worn by worshippers of
Shiva, Shakti, and Ganesha, and by yogis, usually in a strand of 108 seeds. Also used as a rosary to
count the number of mantras repeated in japa.

**Rupa** : Form; body.

# S

```
rule
```
**Sabha** : Assembly; congregation; public audience.

**Sadachara** : Morality; right behavior.

**Sadashiva** : Eternally auspicious; eternally happy; eternally prosperous. A title of Shiva, the eternally
auspicious One.

**Sad-darshanas** : The six orthodox systems of Indian philosophy: Nyaya, Vaisheshika, Sankhya, Yoga,
Mimamsa, and Vedanta.

**Sadguru** : True guru, or the guru who reveals the Real (Sat–God).

**Sadhaka** : One who practices spiritual discipline–sadhana–particularly meditation.

**Sadhana** : Spiritual practice.

**Sadhana-chatushtaya:** The fourfold aids to spiritual practice: 1) the ability to discriminate between
the transient and the eternal (nitya-anity-astu-viveka); 2) the absence of desire for securing pleasure or
pain either here or elsewhere (iha-anutra-artha-phala-vairagya); 3) the attainment of calmness,
temperance, spirit of renunciation, fortitude, power of concentration of mind, and faith (shama-damadi-
sadhana-smaptti); 4) an intense desire for liberation (mumukshutwa).

**Sadhu** : Seeker for truth (sat); and person who is practicing spiritual disciplines. Usually this term is
applied only to monastics.

**Sadhvi** : A female sadhu.

**Sadhyas** : A group of celestial beings with exquisitely refined natures thought to inhabit the ether.

**Sagara** : Sea; ocean.

**Saguna** : With attributes or qualities (gunas).

**Saguna Brahman** : The supreme Absolute conceived of as endowed with qualities like mercy,
omnipotence, omninscience, omnipresence, etc., as distinguished from the undifferentiated Absolute–
Nirguna Brahman.


**Sahaja** : Natural; innate; spontaneous; inborn.

**Sahasrara chakra** : The “thousand-petalled lotus” of the brain. The highest center of consciousness,
the point at which the spirits (atma) and the bodies (koshas) are integrated and from which they are
disengaged.

**Sahitya** : Association; connection; society; combination; harmony.

**Sai Baba** : See Shirdi Sai Baba.

**Sakara** : With form.

**Sakhyam** : Friendship; companionship.

**Sakshatakara** : Self-realization; direct experience; experience of Absoluteness; Brahmajnana.

**Sakshi(n)** : The witness self; the kutashtha which passively observes the actions of the body and the
senses; seer; the intuitive faculty.

**Sakshichaitanya** : The witness consciousness or intelligence.

**Sama** : Calmness; tranquility; control of the internal sense organs; same; equal.

**Samadarshana** : Seeing all things equally; viewing all things with an equal and even mind; seeing all
things in their essential unity and considering them the same; freedom from responding to things with
either like or dislike, acceptance or avoidance.

**Samadhi** : The state of superconsciousness where Absoluteness is experienced attended with all-
knowledge and joy; Oneness; where the mind becomes identified with the object of meditation; the
meditator and the meditated, thinker and thought become one in perfect absorption of the mind. See
Samprajñata Samadhi, Asamprajñata Samadhi, Savikalpa Samadhi, and Nirvikalpa Samadhi.

**Samana** : The prana that carries the grosser material of food to the apana and brings the subtler material
to each limb; the general force of digestion.

**Samata (samatwa)** : Equality; impartiality; equanimity; equalness; equanimity of outlook in the sense
of making no distinction between friend and foe, pleasure and pain, etc.

**Sambandha** : Relationship; connection.

**Samhara** : Destruction; dissolution.

**Samhita** : Collection; a division of the Vedas; Vedic hymns.

**Sampradaya** : Tradition; school; doctrine; handed-down instruction.

**Samprajñata samadhi** : State of superconsciousness, with the triad of meditator, meditation and the
meditated; samadhi in which one is aware of an object; savikalpa samadhi.

**Samsara** : Life through repeated births and deaths; the wheel of birth and death; the process of earthly
life.

**Samsaric** : Having to do with samsara; involved with samsara; partaking of the traits or qualities of
samsara.


**Samshaya** : Doubt; suspicion.

**Samskara** : Impression in the mind produced by previous action or experience; prenatal tendency. See
Vasana.

**Samvega** : Intense ardor derived from long practice.

**Samyama** : Self-control; perfect restraint; an all-complete condition of balance and repose. The
combined practice of the last three steps in Patanjali’s Ashtanga Yoga: concentration (dharana),
meditation (dhyana), and union (samadhi). See the Vibhuti Pada of the Yoga Sutras.

**Sanaka** : One of the Four Kumaras (see Kumaras).

**Sanandana** : One of the Four Kumaras (see Kumaras).

**Sanatana** : Eternal; everlasting; ancient; primeval.

**Sanatana Dharma** : “The Eternal Religion,” also known as “Arya Dharma,” “the religion of those who
strive upward [Aryas].” Hinduism.

**Sanatkumara** : One of the Four Kumaras (see Kumaras).

**Sanatkumaras** : The Four Kumaras (see Kumaras).

**Sanatsujata** : One of the Four Kumaras (see Kumaras).

**Sanchita karma** : Karma produced by acts performed either in this life or in a previous one, but which
remains latent during this present life. Karma which has not yet begun to produce results or fruits.

**Sandhya** : A ritual done at the “junctions” (sandhyas) of the day–dawn, noon, and sunset–during which
the Savitri Gayatri is repeated.

**Sangha** : Attachment; company; association; collection; community.

**Sankalpa** : Wish; desire; volition; resolution; will; determination; intention.

Sankhya: One of the six orthodox systems of Hindu philosophy whose originator was the sage Kapila,
Sankhya is the original Vedic philosophy, endorsed by Krishna in the Bhagavad Gita. (Gita 2:39; 3:3,5;
18:13,19. Also, the second chapter of the Gita is entitled: Sankhya Yoga.) The Ramakrishna-Vedanta
Wordbook says: “Sankhya postulates two ultimate realities, Purusha and Prakriti. Declaring that the
cause of suffering is man’s identification of Purusha with Prakriti and its products, Sankhya teaches
that liberation and true knowledge are attained in the supreme consciousness, where such identification
ceases and Purusha is realized as existing independently in its transcendental nature.” Not surprisingly,
then, Yoga is based on the Sankhya philosophy.

**Sankirtan** : Singing the names and praises of God; devotional chanting.

**Sannyasa** : Renunciation; monastic life.

**Sannyasi(n)** : A renunciate; a monk.

**Sannyasini** : A female renunciate; a nun.

**Sanskrit(am)** : The language of the ancient sages of India and therefore of the Indian scriptures and


yoga treatises.

**Santosha** : Contentment; peacefulness.

**Sapta Rishis** : “Seven Sages.” Great Beings who exist at the top of creation and supervise it.

**Sarada Devi (“Holy Mother”)** : The virgin-wife of Sri Ramakrishna, and a great teacher in her own
right, considered by many to be an incarnation of the Mother aspect of God.

**Saraswati** : “She of the stream.” The name of Brahma’s consort who presides over speech, knowledge,
and the arts; the goddess of wisdom.

**Sarva** : All; everything; complete.

**Sarvajna** : Omniscient; all-knowing.

**Sarvajnatva** : Omniscience.

**Sashtitantra** : A name for the Sankhya philosophy.

**Sat** : Existence; reality; truth; being; a title of Brahman, the Absolute or Pure Being.

**Satchidananda** : Existence-Knowledge-Bliss Absolute; Brahman.

**Satsanga** : Literally: “company with Truth.” Association with godly-minded persons. The company of
saints and devotees.

**Sattwa** : Light; purity; reality. One of the three gunas.

**Sattwa Guna** : Quality of light, purity, harmony, and goodness.

**Sattwic** : Partaking of the quality of Sattwa.

**Satya(m)** : Truth; the Real; Brahman, or the Absolute; truthfulness; honesty.

**Satyaloka** : The highest causal world inhabited by those who have attained liberation (moksha).

**Satya Yuga** : The Golden Age. See Yuga.

**Savikalpa Samadhi** : Samadhi in which there is objective experience or experience of “qualities” and
with the triad of knower, knowledge and known.

**Savitri Gayatri** : A mantra of the Rig Veda which is recited for unfoldment of the intellectual powers
leading to enlightenment.

**Sayujya** : Becoming one with God; united with God; union/merging.

**Seva** : Service; selfless service.

**Sevak** : Servant.

**Shabda** : Sound; word; Vedas: Omkara.

**Shabda Brahman** : Sound-God; Word-God; Brahman in the Form of Sound; Omkara, or the Veda.

**Shabdakshara** : “Sound-syllable;” Om.


**Shaiva** : Shaivite; a devotee of Shiva; pertaining to Shiva.

**Shakta** : A devotee of the Divine Mother, Maha Shakti; pertaining to shakti.

**Shakti** : Power; energy; force; the Divine Power of becoming; the apparent dynamic aspect of Eternal
Being; the Absolute Power or Cosmic Energy.

**Shama** : Calmness; tranquility; control of the internal sense organs; same; equal.

**Shambho** : The beneficient; auspicious; origin of bliss; bestower of happiness. A title of Shiva.

**Shankha** : Conch.

**Shankara (1)** : “The Auspicious One.” A title of Shiva.

**Shankara (2)** : Shankaracharya; Adi (the first) Shankaracharya: The great reformer and re-establisher
of Vedic Religion in India around 300 B.C. He is the unparalleled exponent of Advaita (Non-Dual)
Vedanta. He also reformed the mode of monastic life and founded (or regenerated) the ancient Swami
Order.

**Shalagrama** : A flat-round or disk-like stone with rounded edges, found only in the Mandakini River in
the region of Tibet, considered to be a manifestation of Vishnu and His avataras.

**Shanta** : One who possesses shanti; peaceful; calm; peace; contentment.

**Shanti** : Peace; calm; tranquility; contentment.

**Sharanam** : Refuge; protection, shelter.

**Sharanagati** : Taking refuge or shelter, seeking protection. One who has taken refuge or shelter, or
sought protection.

**Sharira** : Body; sheath; literally: “that which perishes,” from the root shri which means “to waste
away.”

**Shastra** : Scripture; spiritual treatise.

**Shastri** : One who knows the shastras; teacher of the shastras.

**Shaucha** : Purity; cleanliness.

**Shesha** : The endless; the infinite; The name of the snake (naga) upon which Vishnu reclines.

**Shesha Narayan** : The form of Vishnu reclining upon Shesha, the infinite (endless) snake (naga).

**Shikha** : A tuft of hair on the crown of the head, usually worn only by Brahmins or brahmacharis, but in
the villages of Northern India many men of other castes wear the shikha as a sign that they are Hindus.

**Shiksha** : Teaching; instruction.

**Shila (1)** : Stone; rock.

**Shila (2)** : Conduct; good behavior; right discipline; morality.

**Shirdi Sai Baba** : Perhaps the most renowned spiritual teacher of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries


in India. His fame continues to grow in this century as well.

**Shishya** : Disciple; student.

**Shiva** : A name of God meaning “One Who is all Bliss and the giver of happiness to all.” Although
classically applied to the Absolute Brahman, Shiva can also refer to God (Ishwara) in His aspect of
Dissolver and Liberator (often mistakenly thought of as “destroyer”).

**Shiva Linga(m)** : A column-like or oval (egg-shaped) symbol of Shiva, the Formless All-pervasive
Reality, made of stone, metal, or clay.

**Shraddha (1)** : Faith.

**Shraddha (2)** : An annual ceremony commemorating the dead on the anniversary of their death.

**Shravana** : Hearing; study; listening to reading of the scriptures or instruction in spiritual life.

**Shri (1)** : The goddess Lakshmi; prosperity; glory; success.

**Shri (2)** : Excellent, venerated. A term of respect. Often used as a prefix to the name of deities and holy
personages to indicate “holiness.”

**Shruti** : That which is heard; revealed scripture in the sense of divine communication. Usually applied
to the Vedas, Shankara also spoke of the Upanishads as Shruti.

**Shubha** : Auspicious; fortunate.

**Shuddha** : Pure; clear; clean; untainted.

**Shuddhasattwa** : According to Vishishtadvaita philosophy, shuddhasattwa is a self-luminous,
immaterial, spiritual substance which is unconnected with the three gunas. It is infinite in the higher
regions and finite in the lower regions. It is the “matter” out of which the bodies of gods, avatars,
eternals, and liberated beings are made.

**Shudra** : A member of the laborer, servant caste.

**Shukla** : White; bright.

**Shukla sannyasa** : “White sannyasa.” The adoption of monastic life spontaneously, solely from a
profound urge from within, without any formal external ritual or conferring of sannyasa by another
person.

**Shukta** : Vedic hymn.

**Shyama** : “Dark one;” a name of Krishna because of his dark blue complexion, and also of Kali
because of her dark or black complexion..

**Shyama Charan Lahiri** : See Lahiri Mahasaya.

**Shyamasundara** : “The beautiful dark one”–Krishna.

**Sivananda (Swami)** : A great twentieth-century Master, founder of the world-wide Divine Life Society,
whose books on spiritual life and religion are widely circulated in the West as well as in India.


**Siddha** : A perfected being, an adept, a seer, a perfect yogi.

**Siddhi** : Spiritual perfection; psychic power.

**Sita** : The consort of Rama and daughter of King Janaka.

**Skanda** : See Subramunya.

**Skandha** : Group; aggregate.

**Sloka** : A Sanskrit verse. Usually it consists of two lines of sixteen syllables each, or four lines of eight
syllables each.

**Smarana(m)** : Remembrance (of God).

**Smriti** : Memory; recollection; “that which is remembered.” In this latter sense, Smriti is used to
designate all scriptures except the Vedas and Upanishads (which are considered of greater authority).

**Snana** : Ritual bath in a sacred river, pond, lake, or ocean.

**So’ham** : “I am He.”

**Soma** : A milkweed, Ascelpias acida, whose juice in Vedic times was made into a beverage and offered
in sacrifices; the nectar of immorality; a name of Chandra, the presiding deity of the moon.

**Spanda** : Vibration; expanding vibration; flutter; throb; movement; creative shakti; pulsation; creative
pulsation; apparent motion in the motionless Shiva which brings about the manifestation, maintenance,
and withdrawal of the universe; the principle of apparent movement from the state of absolute unity to
the plurality of the world.

**Sparsha** : Touch; sense contact.

**Sphatika** : Clear quartz crystal.

**Sphota** : The Sanskrit original of our English word “spot;” manifester; the idea which bursts or flashes–
including the Pranava which burst or flashes forth from the Absolute and becomes transformed into the
Relative.

**Sreyo marga** : The path of the good or truly beneficial, as opposed to the path of the merely appealing,
pleasant, pleasurable, or that which leads to worldly gain.

**Sri** : Holy; sacred; excellent; venerated (venerable); revered; a term of respect similar to “Reverend.”
Also: prosperity, glory, and success–and therefore an epithet for Lakshmi, the goddess of wealth and
abundance, the consort of Vishnu. It is often used as an honorific prefix to the name of deities and holy
persons to indicate holiness (Sri Krishna, Sri Swami N., etc.). Also used as the equivalent of the
English “Mr.” (Srimati would be the equivalent of “Mrs.”)

**Sri Yantra** : The mystical diagram showing the movement of the spiritual energies inherent in and
produced by the supreme mantra: Om. The Sri Yantra has also come to be identified with the energy-
power of the Divine Mother, and if often worshipped by her devotees.

**Sri Vaishnava** : A worshipper of Vishnu according to the philosophical school of Sri Ramanuja known
as Vishishtadvaita Vedanta (Qualified Non-Dualism).


**Srimad Bhagavatam** : One of the eighteen scriptures known as Puranas which are attributed to Vyasa.
See Bhagavatam.

**Srishti** : Creation; projection or gradual unfoldment of what exists potentially in the cause; evolution of
the universe from its seed state.

**Sruti** : Sacred scripture. The Vedas and Upanishads.

**Steya** : Stealing.

**Sthala** : Abode; place; hall.

**Sthana** : Position; abode; residence.

**Sthira** : Fixed; firm; still; steady; stable; enduring.

**Sthirata (Sthirattwa)** : Steadiness or firmness of body or mind; the steady tranquillity born of
meditation.

**Sthitaprajna** : Establishment in Divine Consciousness; one who is so established.

**Sthiti** : Steadiness; condition or state; existence; being; subsistence; preservation.

**Sthula** : Gross material; physical entity; atomic matter.

**Sthula-sharira** : Gross body; physical body; body of atomic matter.

**Stotra(m)** : Hymn in praise of God.

**Subramanya** : The god of war and son of Shiva and Parvati.

**Sukha** : Happiness; joy; happy; pleasant; agreeable.

**Sukshma** : Subtle; fine.

**Sukshma** : Subtle sense organ; sometimes applied to the mind itself.

**Sukshma-sharira** : Subtle body; astral body (also called linga sharira).

**Sundara** : Beautiful.

**Sureshwaracharya** : Sureshwaracharya was a renowned disciple of Shankara.

**Surya** : The sun; the presiding deity of the sun, sometimes identified with Vishnu (Surya-Narayana) or
the Absolute Brahman.

**Surya-mandala** : The circle (orbit) of the sun.

**Suryanarayana** : God (Narayana) in the form of the Sun (Surya).

**Sushumna** : A subtle passage in the midst of the spinal column, corresponding to the spinal cord, that
extends from the base of the spine to the medulla oblongata in the head.

**Sushupti** : The dreamless sleep state.

**Sutra** : Literally: a thread. An aphorism with minimum words and maximum sense; a terse sentence.


**Swa(r)loka** : The median astral world.

**Swara** : Sound; accent; tone.

**Swabhava** : One’s own inherent disposition, nature, or potentiality; inherent state of mind; state of inner
being.

**Swadharma** : One’s own natural (innate) duty (dharma), based on their karma and samskara. One’s
own prescribed duty in life according to the eternal law.

**Swadhishthana chakra** : Energy center located in the spine a little less than midway between the base
of the spine and the area opposite the navel. Seat of the Water element.

**Swadhyaya** : Introspective self-study or self-analysis leading to self-understanding. Study of spiritual
texts. Swadhyaya: Self study; study of scriptures pertaining to the Self.

**Swaha** : “It is offered.” Invocation at offerings to the gods. A mantra used when offering oblations to
the sacrificial fire.

**Swahananda Swami** : Swami Swahananda is a senior monk of the Ramakrishna Order, a disciple of
Swami Vijnanananda, a direct disciple of Sri Ramakrishna, and head of the Vedanta Society of
Southern California.

**Swaloka** : The median astral world. See Swarloka.

**Swami(n)** : Literally, “I am mine”–in the sense of absolute self-mastership. It is often used in the sense
of “lord” or owner as well as a spiritual guide or authority. God Himself is the ultimate Swami. As a
matter of respect it is always used in reference to sannyasis, since they have vowed themselves to
pursue the knowledge of the Self, or those considered to be of spiritual advancement.

**Swapna** : The dream state; a dream.

**Swaprakasha** : Self-luminous; self-illumined; self-revealing.

**Swara** : Sound; accent; tone.

**Swarga/Swargaloka** : Heaven; the celestial region; a place of light and happiness.

**Swarloka** : The highest of the three lower worlds–Bhur, Bhuvah, and Swah.

**Swarupa** : “Form of the Self.” Natural–true–form; actual or essential nature; essence. A revelatory
appearance that makes clear the true nature of some thing.

**Swarupasthiti** : Established in the Self; firmly established in one’s own essential nature.

**Swasti** : “May it be well.: An expression of salutation meaning “may it be well with you.” Successful;
fortune; well-being.

**Swastika** : Sign of auspiciousness.

**Swayambhu** : Self-existent or self-generated.

**Swayamjyoti** : Self-luminous; self-illumined.


**Swayamprakasha** : Self-luminous; self-illumined.

**Swatantra** : “Self-rule;” independent; free; absolute freedom.

# T

```
rule
```
**Taimni, I. K.** : A professor of chemistry in India. He wrote many excellent books on philosophy and
spiritual practice, including The Science of Yoga, a commentary on the Yoga Sutras. For many years he
was the spiritual head of the Esoteric Section of the Theosophical Society headquartered in Adyar,
Madras (Tamilnadu), and traveled the world without publicity or notoriety, quietly instructing many
sincere aspirants in the path to supreme consciousness.

**Tala** : Place; world. See Loka.

**Tamas** : Dullness, inertia, folly, and ignorance. One of the three gunas.

**Tamasic** : Possessed of the qualities of the tamo guna (tamas). Ignorant; dull; inert; and dark.

**Tandava** : Dance of Destruction (Dissolution of the Cosmos) of Lord Shiva.

**Tanmatras** : The pure elements; the subtle essence of the five elements, elemental essence.

**Tantra** : A manual of or a particular path of sadhana laying great stress upon japa of a mantra and other
esoteric practices relating to the powers latent in the human complex of physical, astral, and causal
bodies in relation to the cosmic Power usually thought of as the Divine Feminine.

**Tantric** : Pertaining to Tantra.

**Tapa** : Heating; producing heat.

**Tapas** : See tapasya.

**Tapaswin** : One who is practicing tapasya.

**Tapasya** : Austerity, practical (i.e., result-producing) spiritual discipline; spiritual force. Literally it
means the generation of heat or energy, but is always used in a symbolic manner, referring to spiritual
practice and its effect, especially the roasting of karmic seeds, the burning up of karma.

**Tapatraya** : Sufferings or afflictions of three kinds, to which mortals are subject: 1) those caused by
one’s own body (adhyatmika), 2) those caused by beings around him (adhibhautika), and 3) those
caused by devas (adhidaivika).

**Tapoloka** : The median causal world exclusively inhabited by advanced spirits who perpetually engage
in meditation–tapasya.

**Tara** : Savior; Deliverer; a title of the Divine Mother.

**Taraka** : Deliverer.

**Taraka Mantra** : From the root word tara–that which crosses. The Taraka Mantra is that which enables
its invokers to cross over the ocean of samsara and attain liberation.

**Taraka Nama** : The Delivering Name; Om.


**Tarka** : Reasoning; logic; argumentation; debate.

**Tat Twam Asi** : “Thou art That.” The Mahavakya (Great Saying) of the Chandogya Upanishad.

**Tattwa** : “Thatness.” Principle; element; the essence of things; truth; reality.

**Tattwa jnana** : Knowledge of Brahman; same as Brahmajnana.

**Tejas** : Radiance; brilliancy (especially spiritual); Agni; heat; the element of fire, from which the sense
of sight (rupa) arises.

**Tejomaya** : Full of tejas; full of light; resplendent.

**Thakur** : “Master” or “Lord.” A reference to God or to a holy person considered to be one with God.

**Tilaka** : A sacred mark made on the forehead or between the eyebrows denoting what form of God the
person worships.

**Timira** : Darkness; disease of the eye producing double vision or darkening the vision; glaucoma.

**Tirtha** : A sacred place of pilgrimage; a river or body of water in which it is auspicious and spiritual
beneficial to bathe; the water offered in ritual worship and then sprinkled on or drunk by the devotees.

**Titiksha** : Endurance of opposites; forbearance; tolerance; the ability to withstand opposites like
pleasure and pain, heat and cold, etc., with equal fortitude; the bearing of all afflictions without caring
to change them and without anxiety or lament.

**Tivra Mumukshutva** : Intense, earnest and consuming desire for liberation (moksha).

**Trataka** : Steady gazing; the process of fixing the gaze on a small dot, point, yantra, etc.

**Treta Yuga** : The Silver Age. See Yuga.

**Triguna** : The three gunas: sattwa, rajas, and tamas. See Guna.

**Triloka** : The three worlds: Bhur, Bhuvah, and Swah.

**Trimurti** : “The three forms”–Brahman, Vishnu, and Shiva, the Hindu “Trinity.”

**Triputi** : “The triple form.” The triad of: knowing, knower, and object known; cognizer, object, and
cognition; seer, sight, and seen.

**Trishna** : Thirst; craving; desire.

**Triveni** : The confluence of the three sacred rivers: Ganges, Jumna (Yamuna), and Saraswati, located
outside the sacred city of Rudraprayag (called Allahabad in modern times). Considered the most place
for purificatory bathing.

**Tukaram** : A poet-saint of seventeenth century India (Maharashtra) devoted to Krishna in his form of
Panduranga (Vittala).

**Tulasi** (Tulsi): The Indian basil plant sacred to Vishnu. Considered a manifestation of the goddess
Lakshmi. Its leaves are used in worship of Vishnu and his avataras, and its stems and roots are formed
into rosary beads used for counting the repetition of the mantras of Vishnu and his avataras. The leaves


of tulasi are also used for purification and even medicinally.

**Turiya** : The state of pure consciousness. A Ramakrishna-Vedanta Wordbook defines it as: “The
superconscious; lit., ‘the fourth,’ in relation to the three ordinary states of consciousness–waking,
dreaming, and dreamless sleep–which it transcends.”

**Turiya-Turiya** : “The consciousness of Consciousness;” the Absolute Consciousness of God, the
Consciousness behind our individualized consciousness (turiya).

**Tushti(s)** : Contentment; satisfaction; satisfaction, contentment, or happiness with the status quo.

**Tyaga** : Literally: “abandonment.” Renunciation–in the Gita, the relinquishment of the fruit of action.

**Tyagi** : A renouncer, an ascetic.

# U

```
rule
```
**Uchchaishravas** : The name of Indra’s horse (or the horse of the Sun god, Surya), that was born of the
amrita that was churned from the ocean by the gods. The name means “high-sounding” and refers to
the power of mantra.

**Udana** : The prana which brings up or carries down what has been drunk or eaten; the general force of
assimilation.

**Udgitha** : The Pranava [Om] when it is sung aloud in Vedic recitation.

**Uma** : See Parvati.

**Upadesha** : Spiritual instruction.

**Upadhi** : Limiting adjunct; association; attribute.

**Upanayana(m)** : Investure with the sacred thread (yajnopavita) and initiation into the Gayatri mantra.

**Upanishads** : Books (of varying lengths) of the philosophical teachings of the ancient sages of India on
the knowledge of Absolute Reality. The upanishads contain two major themes: (1) the individual self
(atman) and the Supreme Self (Paramatman) are one in essence, and (2) the goal of life is the
realization/manifestation of this unity, the realization of God (Brahman). There are eleven principal
upanishads: Isha, Kena, Katha, Prashna, Mundaka, Mandukya, Taittiriya, Aitaryeya, Chandogya,
Brihadaranyaka, and Svetashvatara, all of which were commented on by Shankara, thus setting the seal
of authenticity on them.

**Uparati** : Uparati is the power–once the sense have been restricted–to ensure that they may not once
again be drawn toward worldly objects; indifference toward the enjoyment of sense-objects; surfeit;
discontinuance of religious ceremonies following upon renunciation; absolute calmness; tranquillity;
renunciation.

**Upasana** : “Sitting near” or “drawing near” in the sense of learning by listening to spiritual teaching;
also worship, adoration, contemplation of God or deity; devout meditation.

**Upasaka** : One who engages in upasana.

**Urdhvareta yogi** : The yogi in whom the seminal energy flows upwards.


**Ushmapas** : A class of ancestors (pitris) which live off subtle emanations or vapors.

**Utsava** : Festival; celebration.

**Utsava murti** : The image of a deity that is taken out in procession rather than the main image in the
temple which is usually permanently affixed to a stone pedestal.

**Uttama** : Highest; superior; best.

**Uttara** : Higher.

**Uttarayana** : “Northern way.” The half of the year beginning on the winter solstice (December 21)
when the sun appears to be moving northward.

# V

```
rule
```
**Vach** : Word; Divine Word; logos; speech.

**Vachaka** : That which is denoted by speech.

**Vachya** : That which is denoted by speech.

**Vahana** : Vehicle; conveyance.

**Vaidika** : Vedic.

**Vaikhari** : Sound that is spoken and heard.

**Vaikuntha** : The celestial abode (loka) of Vishnu and His devotees.

**Vairagi** : A renunciate.

**Vairagya** : Non-attachment, detachment, dispassion, absence of desire, or indifference. Indifference
towards and distaste for all worldly things and enjoyments.

**Vaishnava** : A devotee of Vishnu.

**Vaishvanara** : Universal Being. Brahman as the universe. The deity Agni, also the element of Cosmic
Fire, which includes all forms of manifested fire, including digestive fire in the bodies of sentient
beings.

**Vaishya** : A member of the merchant, farmer, artisan, businessman caste.

**Vajra** : Diamond; thunderbolt–the special weapon of Indra, king of the gods.

**Vak** : Speech; voice, world; Primoridal Word (Om); Logos.

**Vakya** : Word or statement.

**Valmiki** : The first poet of India, author of the Ramayana.

**Vanaprastha** : Literally: a forest (vana) dweller. The third stage of life (ashrama) in which, leaving
home and children, the husband and wife dwell together in seclusion and contemplation as a
preparation to taking sannyasa.


**Varna** : Caste. (Literally: color.) In traditional Hindu society there were four divisions or castes
according to the individual’s nature and aptitude: Brahmin, Kshatriya, Vaishya, and Shudra.

**Varnashrama** : Related to the four castes and the four stages (ashramas) of Hindu life; the laws of caste
and ashrama.

**Varnashram dharma** : The observance of caste and ashram.

**Varshneya** : Clansman of the Vrishnis–a title of Krishna.

**Varuna** : A Vedic deity considered the sustainer of the universe and also the presiding deity of the
oceans and water. Often identified with the conscience.

**Vasana** : A bundle or aggregate of similar samskaras. Subtle desire; a tendency created in a person by
the doing of an action or by enjoyment; it induces the person to repeat the action or to seek a repetition
of the enjoyment; the subtle impression in the mind capable of developing itself into action; it is the
cause of birth and experience in general; the impression of actions that remains unconsciously in the
mind.

**Vasanakshaya** : Annihilation of subtle desires and impressions.

**Vashishtha** : One of the most famous of Vedic seers (rishis).

**Vasudeva** : “He who dwells in all things”–the Universal God; the father of Krishna, who is also
sometimes called Vasudeva.

**Vasuki** : The king of the serpents. He assisted at the churning of the milk ocean.

**Vasus** : Eight Vedic deities characterized by radiance.

**Vayu** (1): The Vedic god of the wind.

**Vayu** (2): Air; the element of air, from which the sense of touch (sparsha) arises.

**Veda** : Knowledge, wisdom, revealed scripture. See Vedas.

**Vedanta** : Literally, “the end of the Vedas;” the Upanishads; the school of Hindu thought, based
primarily on the Upanishads, upholding the doctrine of either pure non-dualism or conditional non-
dualism. The original text of this school is Vedanta-darshana or the Brahma Sutras compiled by the
sage Vyasa.

**Vedanta Sutras** : The Brahma Sutras.

**Vedantin** : A follower of Vedanta.

**Vedas** : The oldest scriptures of India, considered the oldest scriptures of the world, that were revealed
in meditation to the Vedic Rishis (seers). Although in modern times there are said to be four Vedas
(Rig, Sama, Yajur, and Atharva), in the upanishads only three are listed (Rig, Sama, and Yajur). In
actuality, there is only one Veda: the Rig Veda. The Sama Veda is only a collection of Rig Veda hymns
that are marked (pointed) for singing. The Yajur Veda is a small book giving directions on just one form
of Vedic sacrifice. The Atharva Veda is only a collection of theurgical mantras to be recited for the cure
of various afflictions or to be recited over the herbs to be taken as medicine for those afflictions.

**Vedic** : Having to do with the Vedas.


**Vega** : Motion; velocity; inertia.

**Vibhu** : All-pervasive; great.

**Vibhuti (1)** : Manifestations of divine power or glory; might; prosperity; welfare; splendor; exalted
rank; greatness; miraculous powers; superhuman power resembling that of God (Ishwara). The quality
of all-pervasiveness (omnipresence). Also sacred ash from a fire sacrifice.

**Vibhuti (2)** : Sacred ash from a fire sacrifice.

**Vichara** : Enquiry/investigation into the nature of the Self, Brahman or Truth; ever-present reflection on
the why and wherefore of things; enquiry into the real meaning of the Mahavakya Tat-twam-asi: Thou
art That; discrimination between the Real and the unreal; enquiry of Self.

**Videhamukti** : Disembodied salvation; salvation attained by the realized soul after shaking off the
physical sheath as opposed to jivanmukti which is liberation even while living.

**Vidvan** : A knower; usually applied to a knower of the Self as distinct from the body; one who is
learned; an expert in all aspects of the Sanskrit language.

**Vidvat sannyasa** : Renunciation after the attainment of the knowledge of Brahman. Asceticism resorted
to by the wise (jnanis) and perfected ones (siddhas). Renunciation by the wise.

**Vidya** : Knowledge; both spiritual knowledge and mundane knowledge.

**Vidyapith(a)** : A school.

**Vijaya** : Victory; triumph.

**Vijnana** : Supreme knowledge; supreme wisdom; supreme realization.

**Vijnana** : Buddhi; intellect.

**Vijnanamaya kosha** : The jnanamaya kosha, the buddhi.

**Vikalpa** : Imagination; mental construct; abstraction; conceptualization; hallucination; distinction;
experience; thought; oscillation of the mind.

**Vikara** : Change, change of form, or modification–generally with reference to the modification of the
mind, individually or cosmically.; gluiness; manifestation.

**Vikshepa** : The projecting power of the mind, causing external involvement; the movement of pushing
outward or away; the projecting power of ignorance; mental restlessness resulting from the awareness
moving out from the center that is the Self.

**Vimala** : Purity; unblemished; without stain or defect.

**Vinaya** : Humility; sense of propriety; manners; rule of conduct; education; mental culture and
refinement; discipline.

**Vipra** : “Twice-born.” A term usually applied to those that have been invested with the yajnopavita
(sacred thread) and initiated into the Gayatri mantra. Since the Kshatriya and Vaishya castes no longer
do this, today vipra almost exclusively means a Brahmin. Vipra can also be meant in a spiritual manner,
indicated one that has been “born” spiritually as well as physically.


**Viraj** : The macrocosm; the manifested universe; the world man–the masculine potency in nature in
contradistinction to the feminine potency.

**Viraja homa** : “Universal homa;” the final fire sacrifice done just before taking sannyas in which
offerings are made to all living beings in petition for their releasing of the prospective sannyasin from
all karmic obligations he might have in relation to them.

**Virat** : The cosmic form of the Self as the cause of the gross world; the all-pervading Spirit in the form
of the universe.

**Virochana** : King of the demons (asuras). According to the Chandogya Upanishad, along with Indra he
went to the Creator to learn the nature of the Self. Misunderstanding the teaching: “Virochana, satisfied
for his part that he had found out the Self, returned to the demons and began to teach them that the
body alone is to be worshiped, that the body alone is to be served, and that he who worships the body
and serves the body gains both worlds, this and the next.”

**Virya** : Strength; power; energy; courage.

**Vishaya (1)** : Doubt.

**Vishaya (2)** : Object; object of perception or enjoyment; subject matter; content.

**Vishaya-chaitanya** : Consciousness as objects; the object known; the consciousness determined by the
object cognized.

**Vishayavritti** : Thought of sensual objects.

**Vishesha** : Special; distinctive qualification.

**Vishishta** : Qualified; particularity.

**Vishishtadvaita Vedanta** : The philosophy of Qualified Non-Dualism formulated by Sri Ramanuja.

**Vishnu** : “The all-pervading;” God as the Preserver.

**Vishuddha** : Supremely pure; totally pure.

**Vishuddha chakra** : “Supreme purity.” Energy center located in the spine opposite the hollow of the
throat. Seat of the Ether element.

**Vishuddhi** : Supreme purity; total purity.

**Vishwa** : Universe; all pervasive.

**Vishwa-devas** : A group of twelve minor Vedic deities.

**Vishwanatha** : “Lord of the Universe;” a title of Shiva, often applied to his temple in Varanasi
(Benares).

**Vishwaprana** : Universal Life or Prana.

**Vishwarupa** : Universal/Cosmic Form (see chapter eleven of the Bhagavad Gita); multiform having all
forms.


**Vittaishana** : Desire for wealth.

**Vitthala** : A title of Krishna, meaning “the one standing on a brick,” a reference to the image of Krishna
worshipped in Pandharpur in Western India.

**Vivarta** : Illusory appearance; a doctrine of the Nondualistic school of Vedanta philosophy explaining
creation as an illusory appearance of the Absolute; apparent variation; illusory manifestation of
Brahman; apparent or unreal or seeming change; superimposition; appearance.

**Vivarta-vada** : Phenomenalism. See Vivarta.

**Viveka** : Discrimination between the Real and the unreal, between the Self and the non-Self, between
the permanent and the impermanent; right intuitive discrimination; ever-present discrimination between
the transient and the permanent.

**Vivekananda (Swami)** : The chief disciple of Sri Ramakrishna, who brought the message of Vedanta to
the West at the end of the nineteenth century.

**Viveki** : One who possesses discrimination (viveka).

**Vividisha sannyasa** : Renunciation for the purpose of knowing Brahman.

**Vrata** : Vow; a resolution; rule of conduct.

**Vritti** : Thought-wave; mental modification; mental whirlpool; a ripple in the chitta (mind substance).

**Vyakta** : Manifested; revealed.

**Vyana** : The prana that holds prana and apana together and produces circulation in the body.

**Vyasa** : One of the greatest sages of India, commentator on the Yoga Sutras, author of the Mahabharata
(which includes the Bhagavad Gita), the Brahma Sutras, and the codifier of the Vedas.

**Vyavahara** : Worldly activity; relative activity as opposed to Absolute Being; empirical/phenomenal
world; worldly relation.

**Vyoma** : Akasha; ether.

# W

```
rule
```
**Word-Brahman** : Om; Shabda Brahman.

# Y

```
rule
```
**Yajna** : Sacrifice; offering; sacrificial ceremony; a ritual sacrifice; usually the fire sacrifice known as
agnihotra or havan.

**Yajnavalkya** : A great Vedic seer whose teachings are found in the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad.

**Yajnaypitha** : See Yajnasthala.

**Yajnasthala** : An open sided, roofed structure in which the fire sacrifice is performed.


**Yajnopavita** : Sacred thread. A triple thread worn by the twice-born (dwijas) that represents the
threefold Brahman. It is essential for the performance of all the rites of the twice-born. Usually worn
only by Brahmins, originally it was worn by Kshatriyas and Vaishyas as well.

**Yajnopavitin** : Wearer of the sacred thread (yajnopavita).

**Yaksha** : There are two kinds of yakshas: 1) semidivine beings whose king is Kubera, the lord of
wealth, or 2) a kind of ghost, goblin, or demon.

**Yama (1)** : Restraint; the five Don’ts of Yoga: 1) ahimsa–non-violence, non-injury, harmlessness; 2)
satya–truthfulness, honesty; 3) asteya–non-stealing, honesty, non-misappropriativeness; 4)
brahmacharya–continence; 5) aparigraha–non-possessiveness, non-greed, non-selfishness, non-
acquisitiveness.

**Yama (2)** : The Lord of Death, controller of who dies and what happens to them after death.

**Yantra** : Geometrical designs of the energy patterns made by mantras when they are recited or which,
when concentrated on produce the effects of the corresponding mantras. Though often attributed to
deities, they are really the diagrams of the energy movements of those deities’ mantras.

**Yasha(s)** : Fame; celebrity; good repute.

**Yati** : “Wanderer;” a wandering ascetic.

**Yatra** : Pilgrimage.

**Yatri** : Pilgrim.

**Yoga** : Literally, “joining” or “union” from the Sanskrit root yuj. Union with the Supreme Being, or any
practice that makes for such union. Meditation that unites the individual spirit with God, the Supreme
Spirit. The name of the philosophy expounded by the sage Patanjali, teaching the process of union of
the individual with the Universal Soul.

**Yoga Darshan(a)** : Hinduism embraces six systems of philosophy, one of which is Yoga. The basic text
of the Yoga philosophy–Yoga Darshana–is the Yoga Sutras (also called Yoga Darshana), the oldest
known writing on the subject of yoga, written by the sage Patanjali, a yogi of ancient India. Further, the
Yoga Philosophy is based on the philosophical system known as Sankhya, whose originator was the
sage Kapila.

**Yoga Marga** : The path of meditation and inner purification leading to union with God.

**Yoga Nidra** : A state of half-contemplation and half-sleep; light yogic sleep when the individual retains
slight awareness; a state between sleep and wakefulness. In its higher sense Yoga Nidra is the state in
which the yogi experiences pure consciousness within the state of dreamless sleep, when he is neither
awake nor asleep in the usual sense. And in the highest sense Yoga Nidra is the state in which the three
“normal” states of waking, sleep, and deep sleep have become transmuted into the turiya state of pure
consciousness and the yogi remains “asleep” in relation to those three lesser states.

**Yoga Siddhi** : Spiritual perfection or psychic power resulting from the practice of Yoga.

**Yoga Sutras** : The oldest known writing on the subject of yoga, written by the sage Patanjali, a yogi of
ancient India, and considered the most authoritative text on yoga. Also known as Yoga Darshana, it is
the basis of the Yoga Philosophy which is based on the philosophical system known as Sankhya.


**Yoga Vashishtha** : A classical treatise on Yoga, containing the instructions of the Rishi Vashishtha to
Lord Rama on meditation and spiritual life.

**Yogabhrashta** : One who has fallen away from the practice of Yoga.

**Yogabhyasa** : Practice of Yoga.

**Yogananda (Paramhansa)** : The most influential yogi of the twentieth century in the West, author of
Autobiography of a Yogi and founder of Self-Realization Fellowship in America.

**Yogeshwara** : Lord of Yoga; a Master Yogi; a title of Krishna in the Bhagavad Gita.

**Yogi** : One who practises Yoga; one who strives earnestly for union with God; an aspirant going through
any course of spiritual discipline.

**Yogic** : Having to do with Yoga.

**Yogin** : Yogi.

**Yogini** : A female practicer of yoga.

**Yogiraj** : “King of Yogis,” a title often given to an advanced yogi, especially a teacher of yogi.

**Yojana** : A measure of distance equivalent to nine or ten miles.

**Yuga** : Age or cycle; aeon; world era. Hindus believe that there are four yugas: the Golden Age (Satya
or Krita Yuga), the Silver age (Treta Yuga), The Bronze Age (Dwapara Yuga), and the Iron Age (Kali
Yuga). Satya Yuga is four times as long as the Kali Yuga; Treta Yuga is three times as long; and
Dwapara Yuga is twice as long. In the Satya Yuga the majority of humans use the total potential–four-
fourths–of their minds; in the Treta Yuga, three-fourths; in the Dwapara Yuga, one half; and in the Kali
Yuga, one fourth. (In each Yuga there are those who are using either more or less of their minds than
the general populace.) The Yugas move in a perpetual circle: Ascending Kali Yuga, ascending Dwapara
Yuga, ascending Treta Yuga, ascending Satya Yuga, descending Satya Yuga, descending, Treta Yuga,
descending Dwapara Yuga, and descending Kali Yuga–over and over. Furthermore, there are yuga
cycles within yuga cycles. For example, there are yuga cycles that affect the entire cosmos, and smaller
yuga cycles within those greater cycles that affect a solar system. The cosmic yuga cycle takes
8,640,000,000 years, whereas the solar yuga cycle only takes 12,000 years. At the present time our
solar system is in the ascending Dwapara Yuga, but the cosmos is in the descending Kali Yuga.
Consequently, the more the general mind of humanity develops, the more folly and evil it becomes able
to accomplish.

End:


# Hindu/Sanscrit GLOSSARY

**ABHAYAM: Fearless.
ABHIMANA: Egoism, identification with the body.
ABHYASA: Spiritual practice.
ADHIKARI: A qualified person.
ADHISHTHANA: Substratum, support.
ADHYASA: Superimposition or false attribution of properties of one thing on another thing.
ADHYATMIC: Spiritual.
ADHYAYANA: Study.
ADVAITA: Non-duality.
AGRAHYA: Unknowable.
AHANKARA: Egoism.
AHIMSA: Non-injury in thought, word and deed.
AISVARYA: Divine powers.
AJARAM: Without old age.
ALABDHABHUMIKATVA: The feeling that it is impossible to see reality.
ALASYA: Laziness.
AMARA: Immortal.
AMARA-PURUSHA: Immortal being.
AMRITAM: Immortal.
ANADI: beginning less.
ANAHATA: Mystic sound heard by Yogis.
ANANDA: Bliss, happiness, joy.
ANANDA-GHANA: Cloud of bliss.
ANANDA-SVARUPA: Of the form of bliss.
ANANDAMAYA: Full of great happiness.
ANTAHKARANA: Internal instrument such as mind, intellect, ego and the subconscious mind.
ANANTAM: Infinity.
ANTARATMAN: Inner Self.
ANTARYAMIN: Inner witness.
ANUBHAVA: Experience.
APTA: Realized.
ARHATA: A perfected Soul.
ASAMPRAJNATA: Highest super conscious state where the mind is completely annihilated and
Reality experienced.
ASANA: A bodily pose or posture.
ASHRAM: A hermitage; monastery.
ASHTANGA: Eight limbs.**


**ASURIC: Demoniacal.
ATMA-JNANA: Knowledge of the Self.
ATMA-SVARUP: The essential nature of the Self.
ATMAN: The Self.
AVADHUTA: A naked sage.
AVARANA: Veil of ignorance.
AVIDYA: Ignorance.
AYURVEDA: The ancient Indian science of medicine.**

**BENARES: A holy pilgrimage center of Hindus, now called Varanasi in Uttar Pradesh, India.
BHAGAVAD-GITA: A scripture containing Lord Krishna's teachings.
BHAGAVATA: Name of a Purana (sacred work dealing with the doctrines of creation, etc.)
BHAJAN: Devotional song
BHAKTA: Devotee of God
BHAKTI: Devotion.
BHARATAVARSHA: India.
BHAVA(NA): Feeling; mental attitude.
BHAYANAKA-SABDA: A fear inducing sound.
BHOGI: Enjoyer.
BHUMA: The Unconditioned, the Great Infinite, Brahman.
BHUTA-SIDDHI: A psychic power by which mastery is gained over the elements.
BODHISATTVA: A being who, having developed the Awakening Mind (a mind infused with the
aspiration to attain the state of Buddhahood), devotes his life to the task of achieving
Buddhahood for the sake of all sentient beings.
BRAHMA-CHINTANA: Constant thinking of Brahman.
BRAHMA-JNANA: Direct Knowledge of Brahman.
BRAHMA-NISHTHA: One who is established in the Knowledge of Brahman.
BRAHMA-SROTRI: One who has knowledge of the Vedas and the Upanishads.
BRAHMA-SUTRAS: Classical Vedantic scripture.
BRAHMA-TEJAS: Spiritual halo.
BRAHMA-VIDYA: The science of Brahman, knowledge of Brahman, learning pertaining to
Brahman or the Absolute Reality.
BRAHMACHARYA: Practice of celibacy. Purity in thought, word and deed.
BRAHMAMUHURTA: Period from 4 a.m. to 6 a.m.
BRAHMAN: The Absolute Reality; God.
BRIHADARANYAKA: Name of an Upanishad.
BUDDHA: One who is totally purified from all defilements and who has realized all that can be
known.
BUDDHI: Intellect.**

**CHAITANYA: Pure Consciousness.
CHAKRAS: Centers of energy in the human system.
CHANDOGYA: Name of an Upanishad.
CHELA: Disciple.
CHIRANJIVI: One who has gained eternal life.
CHITTA: Subconscious mind.**

**DAIVIC: Divine.
DAMA: Control of senses.
DARSHAN: Vision.**


**DAYA: Mercy.
DEHA: Body.
DEVAS: Celestial beings.
DHARANA: Concentration.
DHARMA: Righteous way of living as enjoined by the sacred scriptures, virtue.
DHYANA: Meditation.
DIVYA-DRISHTI: Divine perception.
DVESHA: Repulsion; hatred; dislike.**

**EKADASI: Eleventh day of the Hindu lunar fortnight.**

**GANDHA: Smell.
GANGA: River Ganges.
GAYATRI: One of the most sacred Vedic Mantras; goddess.
GITA: Renowned sacred text "Bhagavad-Gita".
GUNA: Quality born of nature.
GURU: Teacher; preceptor.**

**HAVAN: Sacred oblations.
HIRANYAGARBHA: Cosmic intelligence; the supreme lord of the universe; cosmic mind.**

**INDRA: The Lord of gods; the ruler of heaven.
INDRIYAS: Senses.
ISHVARA: Lord; God.**

**JADA: Insentient.
JAPA: Repetition of the Lord's Name.
JIVA: Individual Soul.
JIVANMUKTA: One who is liberated in this life.
JNANA: Knowledge; wisdom.
JNANA-INDRIYAS: Organs of knowledge or perception.
JNANI: (Pronounced Nyani) A wise person.**

**KAIVALYA: Emancipation; state of absolute independence.
KARMA: Actions operating through the law of cause and effect.
KARMA-INDRIYAS: Organs of action - tongue, hands, feet, genital organ and anus.
KARMA-KANDI: One who observes strictly the duties ordained in the scriptures.
KARMASRAYA: Receptacle of actions.
KARUNA: Compassion
KASHAYA: Hidden desires.
KIRTAN: Singing devotional songs.
KRIYA: A type of of exercise in Hatha Yoga.
KSHAMA: Forgiveness.
KUNDALINI: The primordial cosmic energy located in the individual.
KUTIR: A small cottage; hut.**

**LAYA: Merging; dissolution.
LINGA-SARIRA: The subtle body, the astral body.
LOBHA: Greed.**

**MAHA: Great.**


**MAHABHARATA: A Hindu epic.
MAHANT: Great sage
MAHAPURUSHA: A great soul.
MAHARISHI: Great sage
MAHASAMADHI: The departure of a Self-realized saint from his mortal coil.
MAHATMA: Great soul
MAITRI: Friendship.
MANAS: Mind.
MANONASA: Destruction of mind.
MANTRA: Sacred syllable or word, or set of words through the repetition and reflection of
which one attains perfection.
MAYA: The illusive power of God.
MOHA: Infatuation.
MOKSHA: Liberation.
MOUNA: Vow of silence.
MOUNI: One who observes silence.
MUKTI: Liberation.
MUMUKSHU: One who aspires after moksha or liberation.
MUNI: An ascetic.
MURTI: Idol.**

**NADA: Mystic sound.
NIRODHA: Control or restraint.
NIRVANA: Liberation; final emancipation.
NIRVIKALPA-SAMADHI: Super conscious state where there is no modification of the mind or
Triputi.
NITYA-SIDDHA: A liberated soul of marvellous powers who is ever present on the astral plane.
NIVRITTI: Renunciation.
NIYAMA: The second step in Raja Yoga; observance - purity, contentment, austerities, etc.**

**OJAS: Spiritual energy.
OM: The sacred monosyllable which symbolizes Brahman.
OORDHVARETA: A Yogi who has stored up the seminal energy in the brain after sublimating
the same into spiritual energy.**

**PARIVRAJAKA: Wandering monk.
PARAM-DHAMA: Supreme abode.
PARAMAHAMSA: The highest class of Sannyasins.
PASU-SVABHAVA: Animal nature; bestial nature.
PATANJALI: The author of Yoga-Sutras.
PRAKRITI: Mother Nature, causal matter.
PRANA: Vital energy; life-breath.
PRANAVA: The sacred monosyllable Om.
PRANAYAMA: Practice of breath-control.
PRATYAHARA: Abstraction of senses; fifth step in Raja Yoga.
PREMA: Divine Love.
PRITHVI: Earth.
PURANA: Hindu myths and legends.
PURNA-JNANI: A full-blown sage.
PURNA-YOGI: A full-blown yogi.**


**PURUSHA: The Supreme Being.**

**RAGA: Attachment.
RAJA: King.
RAJAS: One of the three qualities of Prakriti which generates passion and restlessness.
RAJA-YOGA: A system of Yoga generally taken to be the one propounded by Patanjali
Maharishi, i.e., Ashtanga Yoga.
RAJASUYA-YAJNA: A sacrifice performed by a monarch as a mark of his subduing all other
kings.
RAMAYANA: A holy narative of Lord Rama.
RASA: Taste.
RASASVADA: Tasting the bliss of lower Samadhi.
RISHI: Sage.
RISHIKESH: A sacred place in the Himalayas.
RUPA: Form.**

**SADHAKA: Spiritual aspirant.
SADHANA: Spiritual practice.
SADHU: Pious man; Sannyasin.
SAGARA: Ocean.
SAHASRANAMA: The thousand Names of the Lord.
SAKSHI: Witness.
SAKTI: Power; the feminine aspect of Divinity.
SAKTI-SANCHAR: Transference of power by a developed Yogi.
SAMA: Serenity; control of mind.
SAMADHI: The state of superconsciousness where Absoluteness is experienced attended with all-
knowledge and joy. Oneness.
SAMSARA: The process of worldly life.
SAMSKARAS: Impressions in the subconscious mind.
SAMYAMA: Perfect restraint, an all-complete condition of balance and repose, concentration,
meditation and Samadhi.
SANKARA: The well known teacher of Vedanta philosophy.
SANKIRTAN: Singing of divine songs.
SANNYASINS: Those who have embraced the life of complete renunciation.
SATCHIDANANDA: Existence absolute(Sat), Knowledge absolute(Chid), Bliss
absolute(Ananda).
SATSANG: Association with the wise.
SATTVA: Purity-one of the three qualities of nature.
SATYA-YUGA: the Age of Truth, the first of the four Hindu time-cycles.
SHABDA: Sound.
SIDDHI: Psychic power.
SIVA: Lord Siva - bestower of auspiciousness on His devotees.
SLOKA: Verse.
SPARSA: Touch.
SRADDHA: Faith.
SRI: Auspiciousness-a name is qualified by putting "Sri" before it as a mark of courtesy and
auspiciousness.
STOTRA: Hymn.
SUDDHA: Pure.**


**SUKHA: Happiness.
SUSHUMNA: The chief among astral tubes in the human body running inside the spinal column.
SUTRA: Aphorism.
SVADHYAYA: Study of scriptures.
SVARUPA: Essential nature; Reality.**

**TAMAS: One of the three qualities of nature which generates inertia, laziness, dullness and
infatuation.
TANMATRA: Subtle, undifferentiated root elements of matter.
TAPAS: Austerity.
TAPASCHARYA: Practice of austerity.
TATTVA: Essence; principle.
TEHSILDAR: Revenue officer.
TRIPUTI: The triad-seer, sight and seen.
TRISHNA: Sense-hankering.
TURIYA: The state of super consciousness, the fourth state transcending the waking, dreaming
and deep sleep states.
TYAGA: Renunciation (of egoism, desires and the world).**

**UDDALAKA: A great sage of yore.
UPADESA: Spiritual advice.
UPANISHADS: Revelation; text dealing with Ultimate Truth and Its Realization.**

**VAIRAGYA: Dispassion.
VASANA-KSHYA: Desireless.
VASANAS: Subtle desires.
VASTU: Article.
VEDANTA: The school of Hindu thoughts (based primarily on the Upanishads).
VEDANTIN: One who follows the path of Vedanta
VEDAS: The most ancient authentic scripture of the Hindus, a revealed scripture and therefore
free from imperfections.
VEERYA: Seminal energy.
VETTA: Knower.
VICHARA: Enquiry into the nature of the Self, Truth, Absolute, Brahman.
VIGRAHA: Attack.
VIKSHEPA: The tossing of mind.
VISHAYA: Sense-objects.
VIVEKA: Discrimination.
VRITTI: A wave in the mind-lake.
VYAVAHARA: (Worldly) activity.**

**YAJNAVALKYA: A great sage of yore.
YAMA: First step in Raja Yoga; Eternal vows - non-violence, truthfulness, etc.
YOGA: Union; union with the Supreme Being - any course that makes for such union.
YOGI (N): One who practices Yoga; one who is established in Yoga.
YONI: Source.**

**ZAMINDAR: A rich landlord.**

